             energies
Article
Market-Based TSO–DSO Coordination: A Comprehensive
Theoretical Market Framework and Lessons from
Real-World Implementations
Matteo Troncia 1, * , José Pablo Chaves Ávila 1 , Carlos Damas Silva 2 , Helena Gerard 3,4
and Gwen Willeghems 3,4

                                         1   Institute for Research in Technology (IIT), Comillas Pontifical University, 28015 Madrid, Spain
                                         2   E-REDES, Distribuição de Eletricidade, S.A., 1050-121 Lisbon, Portugal
                                         3   Flemish Institute for Technological Research (VITO), Boeretang 200, 2400 Mol, Belgium
                                         4   EnergyVille, Thor Park 8310-8320, 3600 Genk, Belgium
                                         *   Correspondence: matteo.troncia@iit.comillas.edu


                                         Abstract: This paper introduces a theoretical market framework (TMF) for conceptualizing and
                                         designing electricity markets, integrating transmission system operator and distribution system
                                         operator (TSO–DSO) coordination mechanisms. The TMF represents a comprehensive tool that
                                         formalizes new, innovative market concepts and their impact on existing markets, and outlines
                                         fundamental categories and decisions essential to market design. This paper, through the TMF,
                                         addresses the integration challenges posed by new mechanisms for system services. Utilizing the
                                         TMF, the study maps 13 European demonstrators’ TSO–DSO coordination solutions, identifying
                                         real-world challenges in designing and implementing novel system services markets. Drawing on
                                         these real-world insights, the paper offers market design and policy recommendations to address
                                         and overcome the specific challenges in market-based TSO–DSO coordination.

                                         Keywords: TSO–DSO coordination; real-world demonstrators; electricity market design; system services
Citation: Troncia, M.; Chaves Ávila,
J.P.; Damas Silva, C.; Gerard, H.;
Willeghems, G. Market-Based
TSO–DSO Coordination: A                  1. Introduction
Comprehensive Theoretical Market
                                              The climate and policy goals driving the ongoing energy transition and decarboniza-
Framework and Lessons from
Real-World Implementations.
                                         tion of our society call for the electricity sector to contribute through the massive use of
Energies 2023, 16, 6939.
                                         renewable energy sources and energy efficiency [1]. With the considerable presence of
https://doi.org/10.3390/
                                         intermittent energy sources and the need to maximize the use of existing infrastructure, it is
en16196939                               increasingly important to adopt a more interactive approach to operating the electric power
                                         system [2]. Addressing the power system transformation at a reasonable cost, without
Academic Editor: Jay Zarnikau
                                         harming the electricity supply security and quality, calls for unlocking the support from the
Received: 29 August 2023                 already connected resources and fostering new resources availability [3–6]. In this context,
Revised: 22 September 2023               cooperation and coordination among SOs are crucial for efficiently managing resources
Accepted: 28 September 2023              and infrastructures; nevertheless, the involved actors’ coordination procedures must be
Published: 3 October 2023                carefully designed to strive for economic efficiency [7]. In order to promote investments in
                                         renewable energy sources (RESs) and enable coordinated procurement of system services
                                         by both DSOs and TSOs for secure system operation, efficient, integrated, coordinated,
                                         and scalable markets are essential in future power systems. These markets should in-
Copyright: © 2023 by the authors.
                                         clude balancing services, non-frequency ancillary services, and congestion management
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
                                         services [8,9]. Ultimately, such markets aim to provide real choice for all end-customers
This article is an open access article
                                         and contribute to energy supply security and sustainability [10].
distributed under the terms and
                                              Market design is a complex task that encompasses the interplay of multiple markets
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
                                         and policy instruments [11–13]. The current market designs for electricity face barriers that
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
                                         hinder the efficient integration of renewable energy sources (RESs), leading to a slower
4.0/).                                   and more expensive energy transition. Several studies in the literature have highlighted




Energies 2023, 16, 6939. https://doi.org/10.3390/en16196939                                                   https://www.mdpi.com/journal/energies
Energies 2023, 16, 6939                                                                                           2 of 28




                          these barriers and proposed alternative market designs mainly focusing on wholesale
                          electricity markets, capacity auctions for system adequacy, and balancing [11,14–23]. The
                          identified hotspots mainly concern time and spatial granularity, market timing, market
                          sequence, traded products, market power risks, and price settlement rules [11,15,17–19,24].
                          To outclass the identified challenges, a market architecture having a novel market sequence
                          for electricity and balancing is proposed for Colombia [18], and improvements for the
                          capacity markets of Chile, Brazil, and Europe are proposed in [14,19,21]. An alternative
                          design for the European balancing market considering different timing is investigated
                          in [20]. A novel market design for North America based on differentiating the wholesale
                          transmission service and retail end-use service and introducing the concept of demand
                          subscription service with fixed cost recovery is proposed in [23]. Auction design for
                          congestion management markets is investigated in [16]. The reviewed proposals cover
                          part of the entire electricity market architecture and consider the integration of large-scale
                          RESs. The emergence of mid- and small-scale RES and new actors (i.e., prosumers, demand
                          response customers, aggregators, and energy communities) and the operators’ need for
                          system services drive the creation of flexibility markets to engage them as FSPs. Hence,
                          the consequent power system decentralization calls for integrating those markets into the
                          entire electricity market architecture and enhancing TSO–DSO coordination.
                                To contribute to the design of integrated electricity markets, this paper proposes a
                          theoretical market framework (TMF) for describing and designing innovative electricity
                          markets. The TMF allows studying the market-based TSO–DSO coordination as well as the
                          challenges of integrating the novel market mechanisms with existing energy and service
                          markets. Regulatory frameworks, such as [10] promote market-based mechanisms for
                          procuring system services, fostering the need for dedicated research on the market-based
                          mechanism for TSO–DSO coordination. Previous work has been conducted on coordination
                          between TSOs and DSOs. Researchers in [25] proposed five different service-agnostic
                          coordination schemes (CSs) that define each system operator’s roles and responsibilities
                          when procuring and using system services provided by the distribution grid. This analysis
                          was further extended by [26–28], who developed seven CS. Then, more specifically for the
                          joint procurement of balancing ancillary services and congestion management services, [29]
                          distinguished three market models for coordination while [30] identified five market
                          design options. Finally, focused on congestion management, [31] describes TSO–DSO
                          coordination under different systems states. However, while these papers and reports
                          describe conceptual market designs concerning flexibility allocation, they do not describe
                          the other market parameters and aspects that also need to be considered while designing
                          a coordinated, integrated market, such as market optimization and operation options.
                          Our framework attempts to fill that gap by adding several fundamental categories with
                          possible choices that need to be made while designing a market, and hence defining a
                          single and compact framework to support flexibility market design and analysis. Through
                          the development of the TMF, the paper leverages 13 demonstrators’ proposals to develop
                          and test innovative market-based and technical mechanisms for TSO–DSO coordination.
                          These proposals are framed within the European H2020 OneNet project, the largest project
                          addressing TSO–DSO coordination to date [32]. The OneNet project core challenge is to
                          unlock flexibility markets at all levels while considering and identifying the associated
                          TSO–DSO operational challenges and proposing mechanisms to support the electricity
                          system with flexibility services. In this context, 13 different market realities located all
                          across Europe were assessed within the project demonstration activities.
                                The TMF proposed in this paper is adopted, within the OneNet project, to map the
                          coordination schemes proposed by OneNet demonstrators to contribute to the definition
                          of the building blocks for the demonstrator activities and, more importantly, to provide
                          recommendations for the design of the novel European electricity market. Consequently,
                          this mapping activity points out the real-world challenges of designing and implementing
                          novel markets for system services. Moreover, it highlights and discusses market gaps,
                          distortions, and inefficiencies that could arise when the novel markets are integrated into
Energies 2023, 16, 6939                                                                                            3 of 28




                          the existing electricity market architecture. The challenges that the paper describes regard
                          structural aspects (e.g., number of sub-markets within a unique market architecture, size of
                          the procurement areas, and roles and responsibilities of the market actors), coordination
                          aspects (i.e., allocation of the available flexibility between buyers and sub-markets), op-
                          timization aspects (e.g., market optimization methodology and strategy, inclusion of the
                          grid constraints), operational choices (e.g., remuneration schemes, clearing mechanism,
                          timing of the procurement), and grid representation aspects (i.e., grid representation and
                          corresponding market phases).
                               The main contributions of this paper can be summarized as follows:
                          1.   Development of the TMF to formalize new, innovative market concepts and their
                               impact on existing markets;
                          2.   Application of this framework to the market design concepts proposed by the OneNet
                               demonstrators;
                          3.   Identification of real-world challenges of designing, implementing and integrating
                               novel markets for system services into the existing market architecture.
                               The manuscript discusses the theoretical findings concerning TSO–DSO market-based
                          coordination and the challenges emerging from the experience of the OneNet demonstrators.
                          Moreover, it contributes to setting the basis for improving the evolution of the European
                          electricity markets by providing recommendations on market design.

                          2. The Theoretical Market Framework
                               The TMF proposed in this paper aims to categorize market concepts, support the
                          analysis of existing markets, and guide the design and integration of novel markets for
                          procuring system services. Moreover, its adoption eases the communication of market
                          concepts. The TMF describes and defines high-level coordination models and, more
                          specifically, market architecture. In this paper, we consider electricity market architecture as
                          the whole mechanism that allows the exchange of electricity products to operate a delimited
                          power system (e.g., a country’s power system). The concept of market architecture is further
                          addressed in Section 3; more specifically, the TMF relies on the concept of interaction, and
                          the set of interactions in the market architecture defines the coordination between actors.
                          The TMF assumes the entire market architecture is composed of sub-markets that may
                          interact, with the following definition for sub-markets: “a sub-market is assumed to be
                          operated by one market operator responsible for the market-clearing of this specific market
                          according to a specific objective” [33].
                               Following the experience of OneNet project demonstrators, the framework focuses
                          on the market-based mechanisms to procure system services in which TSOs and DSOs are
                          the primary buyers of system services. As shown in Figure 1, the framework consists of
                          five pillars composed of different features. These pillars are the following: (i) entire market
                          architecture, (ii) sub-market coordination, (iii) market optimization, (iv) market operation,
                          and (v) grid representation. The first two pillars set up the entire market structure and
                          define the coordination type, while the last three pillars describe the market clearing
                          dimensions. Some features apply to the entire market to represent how the coordination
                          and integration perform, while others apply to the individual sub-markets. Going through
                          each pillar and selecting the desired attribute for each feature, the system service markets
                          are designed while considering the context requirements. In what follows, each pillar is
                          described in more detail.
Energies 2023, 16, 6939
                   x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                                             4 4of
                                                                                                                                                     of 29
                                                                                                                                                        28




                                 Figure
                                 Figure 1.
                                        1. Key
                                           Key elements
                                               elements of
                                                        of the
                                                           the theoretical
                                                               theoretical market
                                                                           market framework.
                                                                                  framework.

                                       Entire Market Architecture
                                 2.1. Entire            Architecture
                                        The entire market architecture pillar is formed by five features: sub-markets,              sub-markets, ser-  ser-
                                             products(s), location,
                                 vices(s), products(s),       location, and and market
                                                                                   market roles and actors. In       In Appendix
                                                                                                                         Appendix A,     A, Figure
                                                                                                                                              Figure A1
                                 depicts thethestructure
                                                  structure of the
                                                                 of entire   market market
                                                                      the entire        architecture    pillar describing
                                                                                                  architecture       pillar features,
                                                                                                                              describing   sub-features,
                                                                                                                                                 features,
                                 and options. and options.
                                 sub-features,
                                        The ‘sub-markets’
                                       The   ‘sub-markets’ feature
                                                                feature of of the
                                                                                the entire
                                                                                    entire market
                                                                                            market architecture
                                                                                                       architecture pillar
                                                                                                                       pillar applies
                                                                                                                                applies to  to the
                                                                                                                                                the entire
                                                                                                                                                    entire
                                 market    and   describes    the  following      attributes:   the   ‘number     of sub-markets’;
                                 market and describes the following attributes: the ‘number of sub-markets’; the ‘timing of              the   ‘timing   of
                                 the  sub-markets’     (i.e., when    these    sub-markets     take   place)   which
                                 the sub-markets’ (i.e., when these sub-markets take place) which captures the temporalcaptures     the  temporal     link-
                                 age between
                                 linkage          different
                                            between           sub-markets;
                                                        different    sub-markets; and the   sub-market
                                                                                          and the sub-market type (i.e.,
                                                                                                                     typethe(i.e.,
                                                                                                                              typethe of market-based
                                                                                                                                          type of mar-
                                 solution) used
                                 ket-based          to acquire
                                               solution)    usedflexibility
                                                                    to acquire   (e.g., bilateral(e.g.,
                                                                                   flexibility     negotiation,
                                                                                                         bilateralauction,     or exchange
                                                                                                                     negotiation,      auction,market).
                                                                                                                                                    or ex-
                                        The   features
                                 change market).          service(s)    and     product(s)    apply     to  each   sub-market        and   concern      the
                                 specific  marketed      product(s)     (i.e., “a  tradable   unit   that  the   network
                                       The features service(s) and product(s) apply to each sub-market and concern the      operator     acquires    from
                                 the flexibility
                                 specific          providers
                                            marketed             and that
                                                          product(s)         entails
                                                                          (i.e.,       the option
                                                                                  “a tradable        to deliver
                                                                                                  unit   that thea service
                                                                                                                     network       case of activation’)
                                                                                                                               in operator       acquires
                                 and   service(s)  (i.e., ‘the  action,   generally     undertaken      by
                                 from the flexibility providers and that entails the option to deliver a service in to
                                                                                                            the  SO,  which    is needed      casemitigate
                                                                                                                                                    of ac-
                                 a technical    scarcity   or  scarcities    that  otherwise     would     undermine      network
                                 tivation’) and service(s) (i.e., ‘the action, generally undertaken by the SO, which is needed          operation     and
                                 may create stability risks”) [34].
                                 to mitigate a technical scarcity or scarcities that otherwise would undermine network
                                        Similarly to service(s) and product(s), the feature ‘location’ is applied to every single
                                 operation and may create stability risks”) [34].
                                 sub-market. The ‘level of spatial granularity’ measures the size of the specific independent
                                       Similarly to service(s) and product(s), the feature ‘location’ is applied to every single
                                 areas considered for flexibility procurement. In power systems, locational granularity can
                                 sub-market. The ‘level of spatial granularity’ measures the size of the specific inde-
                                 be in terms of nodes, voltage levels, and feeders. Then, for each market, the ‘responsible
                                 pendent areas considered for flexibility procurement. In power systems, locational gran-
                                 SO’ must be defined, i.e., the actor who takes up the role of SO. Finally, the voltage level(s)
                                 ularity can be in terms of nodes, voltage levels, and feeders. Then, for each market, the
                                 where flexibility is procured needs to be defined for each sub-market.
                                 ‘responsible SO’ must be defined, i.e., the actor who takes up the role of SO. Finally, the
                                        The fourth feature looks at ‘market roles and actors’ involved in each sub-market.
                                 voltage level(s) where flexibility is procured needs to be defined for each sub-market.
                                 It defines the actors who buy and sell flexibility and who take up the role of MO. In
                                       The fourth feature looks at ‘market roles and actors’ involved in each sub-market. It
                                 addition, it defines whether participation in the sub-market is optional, compulsory, or
                                 defines the actors who buy and sell flexibility and who take up the role of MO. In addi-
                                 hybrid. Optional participation means that FSPs can choose to participate in the sub-market.
                                 tion,  it defines
                                 Compulsory           whether
                                                  means     thatparticipation
                                                                   under certainincircumstances,
                                                                                          the sub-market        is optional,
                                                                                                            certain   partiescompulsory,
                                                                                                                                 might be obligatedor hy-
                                 brid.  Optional     participation     means      that   FSPs can   choose     to  participate
                                 to participate in the sub-market. For instance, in Italy, generators larger than 10 MW           in  the  sub-market.
                                 Compulsory
                                 are obligatedmeans         that under
                                                    to participate          certain
                                                                        in the          circumstances,
                                                                                  ancillary                 certain parties
                                                                                              services market.        However,   might new besources
                                                                                                                                               obligated of
                                 to participate    in  the  sub-market.        For  instance,   in  Italy,   generators
                                 flexibility are also allowed to voluntarily participate in that same market [35]. In this larger    than    10   MWcase,
                                                                                                                                                       are
                                 obligated
                                 participation to participate
                                                  is compulsory   in the
                                                                       andancillary
                                                                              optional,services    market. However, new sources of flexi-
                                                                                           hence hybrid.
Energies 2023, 16, 6939                                                                                               5 of 28




                          2.2. Sub-Market Coordination
                                 The features in the sub-market coordination pillar are the allocation principle of
                          flexibility and timeframe for coordination. In Appendix A, Figure A2 shows the structure
                          of the sub-market coordination pillar depicting features, sub-features, and possible options.
                                 The feature ‘allocation principle of flexibility’ of the sub-market coordination pillar
                          determines how the amount of flexibility at the transmission or distribution level is divided
                          between SOs and sub-markets. Hence, the allocation principle does not apply as one
                          principle to the entire market, but forms a link between two sub-markets. Moreover,
                          the allocation principle only applies when (i) resources are procured in the same time
                          window, (ii) from both the transmission and distribution grid or distribution grid only, and
                          (iii) by different SOs. When these conditions do not apply, the SO who needs flexibility
                          has the exclusive use of this flexibility. In the TMF, we distinguish five options for ‘system
                          operator order’ which are related to the ‘commitment to bid selection’ and the ‘TSO access
                          to DERs’. First, ‘priority for the TSO’ means that the TSO is the first to choose the sources
                          of flexibility (at distribution or transmission level). Commitment to bid selection is formal,
                          signifying that the offered flexibility can be used by the SO while respecting the constraints
                          of the other SOs whose grid might be impacted. Therefore, formal commitment to bid
                          selection implies the selection of the bids by the buyer (e.g., an SO), independent if, from a
                          welfare perspective, it would be more beneficial to let another SO use the bids for another
                          purpose. Additionally, bids are forwarded to other sub-markets as the TSO has priority but
                          no exclusive use over the bids. A second option is ‘priority for the DSO,‘ meaning that the
                          DSO is the first to choose. These sources are located at the distribution level only. There is a
                          formal commitment to bid selection. Bids can be forwarded to other sub-markets. The third
                          option, ‘exclusivity for the TSO’, denotes that the TSO is the only one with access to the bids.
                          Commitment to bid selection is formal, and rejected bids are not forwarded. Similarly, the
                          option’ exclusivity for the DSO’ implies that the DSO is the only one with access to the bids,
                          with a formal commitment to bid selection and no forwarding of rejected bids. The final
                          option, ‘no priority nor exclusivity for TSO or DSO’, implies a conditional commitment to
                          bid selection in a decentralized optimization (i.e., more than one sub-market) and a formal
                          one in a centralized optimization (i.e., only one sub-market).
                                 Conditional commitment refers to the fact that a particular local market with local
                          grid constraints is run first, but without any formal commitment to the market participants.
                          The preliminary results are then shared with the TSO market and integrated into a second
                          market optimization that considers the system objectives. Based on the outcome of that
                          second optimization, the local market is informed about the accepted bids and for whom
                          (for the DSO or the TSO) [25]. For clarity purposes, this paper describes the TMF under the
                          hypothesis of having one DSO and one TSO at the national level. For scenarios in which
                          several local DSOs are connected to a regional DSO, and hence one additional layer exists
                          (e.g., Sweden, Germany), the same principles apply to the relation between the local DSO
                          and regional DSO and the relation DSO-TSO.
                                 ‘Forwarding of bids’, as proposed in [36], refers to transferring eligible bids not utilized
                          in one market to another. This transfer may occur via an intermediary processing step
                          managed by a designated agent.
                                 The ‘timeframe for the coordination’ feature notes in which market phase of each
                          sub-market the coordination will take place, i.e., prequalification, procurement, activation,
                          measurement, activation, and settlement control.

                          2.3. Market Optimization
                              The market optimization pillar entails as features: market optimization methodology,
                          sub-market optimization strategy, and (sub-)market optimization objective. In Appendix A,
                          Figure A3 deals with the structure of the market optimization pillar.
                              The first feature of the market optimization pillar is the ‘market optimization method-
                          ology’ which describes the different options for market optimization between two sub-
                          markets. We distinguish three possibilities, i.e., centralized and decentralized optimization,
Energies 2023, 16, 6939                                                                                              6 of 28




                          and distributed organization. In centralized optimization, one algorithm considers all volt-
                          age levels, including transmission and distribution. Therefore, one optimization for all SOs
                          solves all their system needs. In decentralized optimization, several algorithms optimize
                          for different levels, i.e., at least one for the transmission and one for the distribution levels,
                          and require coordination. There is one optimization for each SO to procure its system needs.
                          Then, coordination is needed between the different optimization levels. In a distributed
                          market organization, there is no (externally driven) optimization [37].
                                 The ‘sub-market optimization strategy’ feature looks at the market optimization ap-
                          plied to couples of sub-markets. This happens, for instance, in the case of more than one
                          sub-market, or when one sub-market procures two products through separate optimization
                          schemes. In simultaneous optimization, both sub-markets are optimized simultaneously
                          while sharing resources. Sequential optimization means that one market is optimized
                          before the other. Independent optimization means that markets are cleared simultaneously
                          (i.e., in parallel, rather than jointly) while only sharing some clearing constraints (if needed)
                          rather than sharing resources (i.e., bids).
                                 The third feature is the ‘(sub-) market optimization objective’. Sub-markets can be
                          optimized according to social welfare maximization or other objectives, such as reducing
                          counter-activations. Maximizing social welfare means maximizing the producer (i.e., FSP)
                          and buyer (i.e., SO) surplus. Markets may also have other objectives, such as reducing the
                          counter-activations from another market, for instance, congestion management after the
                          energy market.

                          2.4. Market Operation
                                The features of the market operation pillar are the following: remuneration scheme,
                          remuneration of the product attribute, market-clearing type, and procurement frequency.
                          In Appendix A, Figure A4 presents the structure of the market operation pillar showing
                          the potential design options.
                                The first feature of the market operation pillar is the ‘remuneration scheme’. Six
                          options can be distinguished: no remuneration, negotiated price, pay-as-bid, uniform pay-
                          as-clear, non-uniform pay-as-clear (i.e., nodal pricing), and cost-based remuneration. When
                          the trade happens through bilateral negotiation, the price is negotiated. The remuneration
                          method ‘pay-as-bid’ (i.e., discriminatory price auction) implies that each seller receives
                          payment for the offered good or service equal to the requested selling price. Hence, the
                          market price is different for each market participant if they bid at different prices [38].
                          The ‘uniform pay-as-cleared’ remuneration (i.e., uniform price auction) implies that all
                          sellers receive the same per-unit price for the offered homogenous good or service which is
                          equal to the lowest accepted bid, regardless of the sellers’ actual selling price. Therefore,
                          the market price is at the intersection of supply and demand curves, which also sets the
                          cleared quantity, i.e., the traded volume [38,39]. Then, ‘non-uniform pay-as-cleared’ refers
                          to nodal pricing, which method determines different clearing prices for the different grid
                          nodes. The nodal price reflects energy’s locational value, including energy and delivery
                          costs (i.e., losses and congestion) [40]. Finally, remuneration is cost-based when based on a
                          determined price or price curve the SO sets for buying a service and potentially agreeing
                          with the FSP on the specified quantity [38]. It is important to note that the FSP may not be
                          remunerated at all in case of mandatory requirements.
                                The second feature describes the ‘remuneration of the product attribute’. Remunera-
                          tion can be for availability, activation, or both, and for active, reactive, and apparent power.
                                The third feature looks at the ‘market-clearing type’. In a continuous market, a market
                          participant can buy and sell assets at any given time when the market is open. Following a
                          discrete auction, market clearing is a recurring, scheduled, frequent batch auction market
                          where the respective market is cleared at discrete intervals (e.g., each quarter-hour) through
                          a uniform auction [26].
                                The ‘procurement frequency’ feature refers to how often the sub-market is run. The
                          difference with the timing of the sub-markets is that, while the procurement frequency
Energies 2023, 16, 6939                                                                                              7 of 28




                          can be identical for different markets, they can still have different timing or GCT. For
                          example, in Belgium, the FCR, aFRR, and mFRR capacity (availability) markets have a daily
                          procurement frequency. However, the GCT of the FCR market is planned before that of the
                          aFRR market, and the GCT of the aFRR market is planned before the one of mFRR market.

                          2.5. Grid Representation
                               The grid representation pillar includes the features representation of grid constraints
                          and timing for the inclusions of grid constraints. In Appendix A, Figure A5 shows the
                          structure of the grid representation pillar highlighting the possible design options.
                               The first feature in the grid representation pillar describes how the ‘representation of
                          grid constraints’ is addressed. EU-SysFlex distinguishes three possible ways to represent
                          grid constraints [37]. First, comprehensive grid data describes the electrical properties of
                          the grid to depict its dynamics. This way, the optimization algorithm can calculate diverse
                          grid phenomena and complete power flow calculations. Secondly, partial grid data uses the
                          sensitivities of flexibilities towards critical V/I constraints and V/I margins in the grid, e.g.,
                          for one topology. Thirdly, bid limitations only are used when the SO reduces or rejects bids
                          which, if accepted as submitted, would cause grid constraints to be violated. Bid limitations
                          can be sent after a pre-selection step or before the selection led by the optimization operator
                          responsible for selecting bids (clear the market or choose in an order book), considering grid
                          data and switching measures [37]. The feature timing of the inclusion of grid constraints
                          refers to the market phase in which grid constraints are included.

                          3. Application of the Theoretical Market Framework to the OneNet Demonstrators
                               The proposed TMF is used in this paper to describe the OneNet demonstrators’ market
                          architecture to support identifying the corresponding gaps and strengths. The TMF is a tool
                          for bottom-up market architecture analysis and design. Starting from the description of
                          every single market-based interaction, the TMF allows for a comprehensive description of
                          the entire market architecture. This section describes the application of the TMF to OneNet
                          demonstrators. This section provides proof of concept of the application of the TMF. The
                          application of the TMF to the OneNet demonstrators follows the following five steps:
                          1.   Identification of buyer–seller interactions;
                          2.   Definition of sub-markets of the market architecture;
                          3.   Description of each sub-market using the TMF features;
                          4.   Description of the interactions between sub-markets using the TMF features;
                          5.   High-level description of the market architecture.
                               System service procurement and provision require coordinating the power system
                          actors involved (i.e., TSO, DSO, and FSP). The TMF studies this coordination by relying
                          on the interaction concept since the set of interactions in the market architecture defines
                          the coordination between actors. The interaction between provider and beneficiary can
                          be classified as technical-based or market-based. As shown in Figure 2, in market-based
                          interactions, the actors interact through a market architecture which may include the
                          interaction with the actor that plays the market operator and, eventually, the market
                          platform. The technical-based interaction is characterized by information exchange and
                          control actions. These interactions are facilitated by a technical architecture, including
                          interoperable platforms, communication protocols, etc., whose complexity may vary. This
                          paper focuses on market-based coordination, hence, on the set of market-based interactions
                          tested in the OneNet project.
                          interactions, the actors interact through a market architecture which may include the
                          interaction with the actor that plays the market operator and, eventually, the market
                          platform. The technical-based interaction is characterized by information exchange and
                          control actions. These interactions are facilitated by a technical architecture, including
                          interoperable platforms, communication protocols, etc., whose complexity may vary.
Energies 2023, 16, 6939                                                                                        8 of 28
                          This paper focuses on market-based coordination, hence, on the set of market-based
                          interactions tested in the OneNet project.




                          Figure      Scheme
                          Figure2.2.Scheme of of
                                              thethe possible
                                                  possible      interactions
                                                           interactions      between
                                                                        between       the involved
                                                                                the actors actors involved  in service
                                                                                                    in system   systemprocure-
                                                                                                                       service
                          procurement and provision.
                          ment and provision.

                          3.1. Procedure
                          3.1. ProcedureAdopted
                                         Adopted to
                                                  to Analyze
                                                     Analyze the
                                                              the OneNet
                                                                  OneNet Demonstrators
                                                                         Demonstrators Using
                                                                                       Using the
                                                                                              theTMF
                                                                                                 TMF
                                  TheTMF
                                 The   TMFstarts
                                              startsanalyzing
                                                       analyzingthe   thesingle
                                                                           singlebuyer–seller
                                                                                   buyer–sellerinteractions
                                                                                                   interactionsto    todescribe
                                                                                                                        describethe   theoverall
                                                                                                                                           overall
                          market
                           marketarchitecture.
                                      architecture. Therefore,
                                                       Therefore,ititconstitutes
                                                                         constitutesaabottom-up
                                                                                         bottom-up approach
                                                                                                        approachto    tomarket
                                                                                                                         marketdesigndesignand and
                           analysis.As
                          analysis.     Asaafirst
                                              firststep,
                                                     step,thethemarket
                                                                  market  architecture’s
                                                                             architecture’sanalysis
                                                                                              analysis     design)
                                                                                                      (or (or  design)requires   studying
                                                                                                                           requires            the
                                                                                                                                        studying
                          buyer–seller
                           the buyer–sellerinteractions    in terms
                                                  interactions      in of  generalized
                                                                        terms             productsproducts
                                                                                 of generalized       (e.g., P, Q,(e.g.,
                                                                                                                    availability,     activation)
                                                                                                                           P, Q, availability,
                          and   timing. More
                           activation)            specifically,
                                          and timing.       Morethe    identification
                                                                     specifically,   theand  analysis of the
                                                                                          identification     andmarket     seller
                                                                                                                    analysis    ofinteractions
                                                                                                                                     the market
                          part   of the  OneNet     demonstrators        is addressed     considering
                           seller interactions part of the OneNet demonstrators is addressed considering the   business     use  cases    (BUCs)the
                          defined    according     to the   standardized      IEC   62559   methodology       and
                           business use cases (BUCs) defined according to the standardized IEC 62559 methodology    described      through     the
                          corresponding
                           and describedtemplate through[41].  the In   the second step,
                                                                     corresponding           the sub-markets
                                                                                          template     [41]. In the  that second
                                                                                                                            form thestep,market the
                           sub-marketsare
                          architecture         identified
                                            that   form the  and   located
                                                                market       considering
                                                                           architecture     theidentified
                                                                                          are    buyer and  and    locateddimensions.
                                                                                                               temporal       consideringThe    the
                          sub-markets       are characterized
                           buyer and temporal            dimensions. by market-based
                                                                           The sub-markets interactions    that differ in
                                                                                                  are characterized         byterms     of actors
                                                                                                                                market-based
                          involved,
                           interactions generalized
                                           that diﬀerproducts,
                                                          in terms and      timing.
                                                                       of actors      The necessary
                                                                                  involved,             information
                                                                                              generalized      products,  forand
                                                                                                                               accomplishing
                                                                                                                                    timing. The
                          the  second    step  has   been   obtained     from   the  BUCs   description
                           necessary information for accomplishing the second step has been obtained from   and   complemented          through the
                          consultation      moments       with   demonstrators’       partners.
                           BUCs description and complemented through consultation moments with    Based    on  the   information       collected
                          in  the previous steps,
                           demonstrators’               the third
                                                partners.      Based step
                                                                        onisthe
                                                                              devoted    to processing
                                                                                 information      collectedtheininformation
                                                                                                                  the previous    to formalize
                                                                                                                                       steps, the
                          athird
                             detailed    description      of  each   sub-market      through    the  TMF     features
                                   step is devoted to processing the information to formalize a detailed description     that   apply     to sub- of
                          markets     individually     (e.g.,   procurement      frequency,    responsible     system
                           each sub-market through the TMF features that apply to sub-markets individually (e.g.,         operator).     Similar
                          to  Step 3, in Step
                           procurement           4, the interaction
                                             frequency,       responsible between
                                                                              system theoperator).
                                                                                         couples ofSimilar
                                                                                                       sub-markets
                                                                                                                 to Step is characterized
                                                                                                                             3, in Step 4, the   in
                          terms    of TMF    features    (e.g.,  allocation   principle   of flexibility).  Hence,
                           interaction between the couples of sub-markets is characterized in terms of TMF features    in  Steps   3  and   4, the
                          collected    information
                           (e.g., allocation            is organized
                                                principle                 into tables
                                                              of flexibility).  Hence,based     on the
                                                                                          in Steps  3 andpillars
                                                                                                             4, theand   the corresponding
                                                                                                                      collected    information
                          features that form the TMF, as defined in Section 2. These tables are tools for addressing
                           is organized into tables based on the pillars and the corresponding features that form the
                          the TMF-based analysis, and once filled, they represent the database that contains all the
                           TMF, as defined in Section 2. These tables are tools for addressing the TMF-based
                          necessary information to describe the market architecture. Section 3.2 reports an excerpt of
                           analysis, and once filled, they represent the database that contains all the necessary
                          the TMF tables adopted for analyzing the OneNet demonstrators.
                           information to describe the market architecture. Section 3.2 reports an excerpt of the TMF
                                 Moreover, the obtained TMF description can be represented graphically; Figure 3
                           tables adopted for analyzing the OneNet demonstrators.
                          depicts the outcome of applying Steps 1 to 4 of the TMF described in Section 2 to the
                                  Moreover, the obtained TMF description can be represented graphically; Figure 3
                          OneNet demonstrators’ market proposals. According to the TMF, Figure 3 describes the
                           depicts the outcome of applying Steps 1 to 4 of the TMF described in Section 2 to the
                          market architecture considering the allocation of flexibility according to the temporal and
                           OneNet demonstrators’ market proposals. According to the TMF, Figure 3 describes the
                          buyer dimensions. The temporal dimension describes the sequence of sub-markets, hence,
                           market architecture considering the allocation of flexibility according to the temporal and
                          the temporal allocation of flexibility from long-term to near-real-time. The buyer dimension
                           buyer dimensions. The temporal dimension describes the sequence of sub-markets,
                          describes the allocation of flexibility between the buyers. Hence, the outcome of Steps 1 to
                          4 allows transposing the market-based interactions into a market architecture formed by
                          sub-markets that interact. Finally, to complement the TMF application and generalize the
                          obtained description, elements from a top-down perspective are introduced in the fifth step,
                          the outcome of which is depicted in Figure 4. This paper maps the TMF representations
                          of the OneNet project demonstrators’ market architectures towards the corresponding
                          coordination schemes, as defined in the CoordiNet project [26,28].
                          of Steps 1 to 4 allows transposing the market-based interactions into a market architec-
                                    of Steps 1 to 4 allows transposing the market-based interactions into a market
                          ture formed by sub-markets that interact. Finally, to complement the TMF application
                                    architecture formed by sub-markets that interact. Finally, to complement the TMF
                          and generalize the obtained description, elements from a top-down perspective are in-
                                    application and generalize the obtained description, elements from a top-down
                          troduced in the fifth step, the outcome of which is depicted in Figure 4. This paper maps
                                    perspective are introduced in the fifth step, the outcome of which is depicted in Figure 4.
                          the TMF representations of the OneNet project demonstrators’ market architectures to-
                                    This paper maps the TMF representations of the OneNet project demonstrators’ market
Energies 2023, 16, 6939   wards the corresponding coordination schemes, as defined in the CoordiNet project                         9 of 28
                                    architectures towards the corresponding coordination schemes, as defined in the
                          [26,28].
                                    CoordiNet project [26,28].




                          Figure 3. Generalized market architecture for the OneNet demonstrators described according to
                                    Figure                 marketarchitecture
                                               Generalizedmarket
                                            3. Generalized
                                    Figure 3.                      architecture
                                                                              forfor
                                                                                   thethe OneNet
                                                                                        OneNet   demonstrators
                                                                                               demonstrators    described
                                                                                                             described     according
                                                                                                                       according to to TMF.
                          TMF.
                                    TMF.




                          Figure 4. Figure
                                    Market 4.
                                            architectures of OneNetofdemonstrators
                                              Market architectures                 in terms ofinTSO–DSO
                                                                      OneNet demonstrators                coordination
                                                                                                terms of TSO–DSO    coordination schemes.
                                    Figure 4. Market architectures of OneNet demonstrators in terms of TSO–DSO coordination
                          schemes.
                                    schemes.
                                         Figure 3 shows a generalized example of bidirectional interactions along the buyer
                                    dimension (i.e., the DSO sub-markets that trigger the TSO sub-markets and vice-versa); both
                                    directions can be described using the TMF. Figure 3 depicts the case where the buyers (TSO
                                    and DSO) act as single buyers in each sub-market. However, the TMF can also effectively
                                    describe the cases in which TSO and DSO are buyers in the same sub-market (common
                                    sub-market), as the two layers collapse in a single TSO–DSO layer; hence the common
                                    sub-market then holds on the horizontal axis shown in Figure 3. If all sub-markets of the
                                    market architecture have both TSO and DSO as buyers, the vertical axis collapses. Figure 3
                                    shows that considering the generalized products exchanged, the market architecture is
                                    formed by two types of sub-markets: the availability and activation sub-markets. The
                                    availability of sub-markets can be linked to the activation ones with an interaction (dotted
                                    arrow) that commits the participants in the former to also participate in the latter. The
                                    bid forwarding interaction (full arrow) links sub-markets of the same type. Figure 3
                                    describes the generalized market architecture of OneNet demonstrators; each specific
                                    market architecture adopted by the OneNet demonstrators can be obtained by customizing
                                    the diagram (deleting sub-markets and interactions, specifying common sub-markets).
Energies 2023, 16, 6939                                                                                                     10 of 28




                                    Finally, according to Step 5 of the methodology adopted, a top-down descriptive
                               approach is used to characterize the market architecture in terms of the global characteristics
                               of the TSO–DSO coordination and complement the market architectures’ description (the
                               aforementioned Step 5). In this paper, the approach proposed in [26,28,29] is used to classify
                               the OneNet market architectures analyzed through the TMF in terms of coordination
                               schemes. Figure 4 depicts the outcome of this step concerning the OneNet demonstrators;
                               each country block represents the corresponding market architecture obtainable from
                               Figure 3. Figure 4 also describes the market architectures in terms of the timing of the
                               TSO–DSO coordination and the corresponding level of market-based coordination. As
                               a result, the OneNet demonstrators belong to three different market models that define
                               specific TSO–DSO coordination schemas: common, multi-level, and fragmented [25–29].
                               The common market model defines a single TSO–DSO market to procure system services
                               from resources connected to transmission and distribution grids. Unlike the common
                               market model, the multi-level market model distinguishes the markets for TSO and DSO,
                               where the TSO has access to DERs. In the fragmented market model, TSO and DSO have
                               dedicated non-linked markets, the TSO does not have access to DERs.
                                    Figure 4 shows that the northern and Greek demonstrators implement the common
                               market model. The Polish, Portuguese, Cypriot, and French (for LT) market architectures
                               implement a multi-level market model. The common and multi-level market models
                               include both market-based and technical-based TSO–DSO coordination. The Hungarian,
                               Slovenian, Spanish, Czech, and French demonstrators proposed a fragmented market
                               architecture. For clarity, the following paragraphs describe the TMF application to the
                               market architectures demonstrated in the OneNet project.

                               3.2. TMF Analysis of the Northern and Polish Demonstrators’ Market Architectures
                                        To present the capability of TMF, the Polish and northern OneNet demonstrators (The
                                   Polish and northern OneNet demonstrators are described in detail in deliverables D7.1,
                                   D7.2, D7.4, D10.2, D10.3 [32]) are discussed in more detail to present how the TMF applies
                                   to market architectures characterized by a market-based TSO–DSO coordination based
                                   on opposing design principles. Figures 5 and 6, respectively, represent the application
                                   of the TMF to the northern and Polish demonstrators. These figures depict the market
Energies 2023, 16, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                    11 of 30
                                   architecture of the demonstrators mentioned; they represent a particularization of the
                                   generalized market architecture in Figure 3. Table 1 reports the nomenclature used in
                                   this paper to describe the sub-markets of the analyzed demonstrators. Moreover, Table 2
                                   tables used
                                   contains  an to elaborate
                                                 excerpt      thetables
                                                          of the  TMF description  of the the
                                                                        used to elaborate     TMFarchitectures
                                                                                          market                    the OneNet
                                                                                                                of the
                                                                                                    description of      market
                                   northern and   Polish demonstrators.
                                   architectures of the OneNet northern and Polish demonstrators.




                               Figure 5. Schematic representation of the market architecture for the
                                                                                                 the Polish
                                                                                                     Polish demonstrator.
                                                                                                            demonstrator.
Energies 2023, 16, 6939                                                                                                       11 of 28
                                 Figure 5. Schematic representation of the market architecture for the Polish demonstrator.




                                 Figure 6. Schematic representation of the market architecture
                                                                                  architecture for
                                                                                               for the
                                                                                                   the northern
                                                                                                       northern demonstrator.
                                                                                                                demonstrator.

                                 Table 1.
                                 Table 1. Nomenclature
                                          Nomenclature adopted
                                                       adopted for
                                                               for naming
                                                                   naming the
                                                                          the sub-markets.
                                                                              sub-markets.

  Element
       Element        First        First            Second Second                   ThirdThird                    Fourth
                                                                                                                    Fourth
             Timing (considering            Grid connection of             Electric variable of the       Generalized product
  Meaning                 Timing (considering           Grid connection of       Electric variable of the   Generalized product
       Meaning gate closure time)
                            gate closure time)service providers
                                                         service providers     product   traded
                                                                                     product  traded              traded
                                                                                                                    traded
                       LT           LT                 T          T                    P    P                        AA
                  (Long-term) (Long-term)      (Transmission)
                                                          (Transmission)       (Active  power)
                                                                                     (Active power)          (Availability)
                                                                                                                (Availability)
                       MT           MT                 D          D                   Q     Q                        EE
                (Medium-term)(Medium-term)      (Distribution)
                                                           (Distribution)     (Reactive  power)
                                                                                    (Reactive power)          (Activation)
                                                                                                                 (Activation)
                                                      TD         TD                   PQ PQ                         AEAE
  Options
       Options         DA           DA
                                            (Transmission       and
                                                        (Transmission   and (Active  and reactive
                                                                                  (Active  and reactive    (Availability
                                                                                                              (Availabilityand
                                                                                                                            and
                 (Day-ahead)  (Day-ahead)
                                                            distribution)
                                                 distribution)                     power) power)                  activation)
                                                                                                               activation)
                       ID           ID
                   (intraday) (intraday)
                      NRT          NRT
                                (Near-real-time)


                                 Table 2. ‘Entire market architecture’ pillar applied to OneNet demonstrators.

                             Polish                  Polish              Northern                Northern          Northern
       Attribute
                            DA-D-P-E               DA-TD-P-AE           LT-TD-P-AE              ID-TD-P-E         NRT-TD-P-E
                                                                Feature: Sub-market dimension
     Timing of the                                                    More than month       From weeks ahead
                            Day-ahead               Day-ahead                                                    Near-real-time
     sub-markets                                                     ahead, event-based        to intraday
   Sub-market type        Auction market       Auction market          Auction market        Auction market      Auction market
                                                                      Feature: Service(s)
                                                                                                                  Congestion
                           Congestion            Congestion                                    Congestion
                                                                                                                  management,
        Service            management,          management,            Service agnostic       management,
                                                                                                                   frequency
                          voltage control     frequency control                             frequency control
                                                                                                                     control
                                                                     Feature: Product(s)
                                                                        Active power
       Product            Active power             Active power                               Active power        Active power
                                                                       availability and
       procured            activation               activation                                 activation          activation
                                                                         activation
Energies 2023, 16, 6939                                                                                                      12 of 28




                                  Table 2. Cont.

                              Polish                 Polish             Northern                  Northern         Northern
       Attribute
                             DA-D-P-E              DA-TD-P-AE          LT-TD-P-AE                ID-TD-P-E        NRT-TD-P-E
                                                                     Feature: Location
                                                    National,
                                                                          National,             National,            National,
    Level of spatial                           transmission grid
                          Distribution grid                          transmission grid     transmission grid    transmission grid
      granularity                               distribution grid
                                                                      distribution grid     distribution grid    distribution grid
                                                 interface nodes
     Responsible
       system                   DSO                   TSO               TSO, DSO                 TSO, DSO          TSO, DSO
      operator
                                                   HV, MV, LV
   Voltage level for
                              MV, LV           (frequency control       HV, MV, LV           HV, MV, LV           HV, MV, LV
      resources
                                                     only)
                                                              Feature: Market roles and actors
      Who is the
                                DSO                   TSO               TSO, DSO                 TSO, DSO          TSO, DSO
       buyer(s)
 Who is the seller(s)           FSP                   FSP                   FSP                    FSP                 FSP
    Who is the MO               DSO                   TSO             DSO, TSO, IMO        DSO, TSO, IMO        DSO, TSO, IMO
     Participation
                              Hybrid                 Hybrid              Optional                 Hybrid            Optional
    in sub-market


                                         The proposed Polish demonstrator’s market architecture has a multilayer TSO–DSO
                                  structure. As generalized by Figure 3, TSO and DSO are alternatively the only buyers in
                                  the sub-markets belonging to the respective layer; several sub-markets form each layer that
                                  spans from weeks ahead to near-real-time, as shown in Figure 5. The OneNet sub-markets
                                  are the new ones developed in the project: the MT-D-P-A and the DA-D-P-E (colored in
                                  grey). Both sub-markets have the DSO as the only buyer and the resources connected to the
                                  distribution network are allowed to bid. The generalized product of the MT-D-P-A is active
                                  power availability (i.e., capacity), while the DA-D-P-E deals with active power activation
                                  (i.e., energy). The capacity bids cleared in the first market determine the obligation to
                                  participate with energy bids in the second market. The leftover bids of the DA-D-P-E are
                                  forwarded to the integrated balancing and congestion management market through a bid
                                  filtering and aggregation process that considers the DSO grid constraints compliance, the
                                  point of connection of the resources, and the bid characteristics.
                                         The northern demonstrator, on the contrary, proposes a common TSO–DSO market
                                  architecture in which all sub-markets involve both the TSO and DSO as buyers. Hence,
                                  considering Figure 6, a common TSO–DSO layer characterizes the market architecture of the
                                  OneNet demonstrator. As depicted in Figure 6, the sub-markets in the market architecture of
                                  the northern demonstrator span from long-term to near-real-time procurement. The OneNet
                                  sub-markets developed by the northern demonstrator are colored in grey in Figure 6. In
                                  all these markets, both the TSO and DSO are buyers, and all the resources connected to
                                  the transmission and distribution grid can participate. The LT-TD-P-AE submarket is a
                                  long-term submarket in which the resources submit active power availability bids (i.e.,
                                  capacity) with an active power activation (i.e., energy) price. The DA-TD-P-A is a day-ahead
                                  sub-market concerning the active power availability product, while ID-TD-P-E and the NRT-
                                  TD-P-E are respectively an intraday and a near-real-time sub-market in which active power
                                  activation products are exchanged. As shown in Figure 6, the sub-markets concerning
                                  availability products determine for the cleared bids the participation forwarding towards
                                  the related sub-markets dealing with activation products. Moreover, bid forwarding exists
                                  among the intraday energy market, ID-TD-P-E and NRT-TD-P-E sub-markets.
                                         For brevity, the main aspects of the market architecture characterizing the Polish
                                  and the northern demonstrators are presented in the following the TMF pillars and fea-
                                  tures. This section focuses on a set of sub-markets and interactions; this set has been
Energies 2023, 16, 6939                                                                                                        13 of 28




                                  selected to describe the greatest variety of circumstances observed in the OneNetžlinebreak
                                  demonstration activities.
                                        Considering the Polish demonstrator, the first sub-market of interest is the DA-D-
                                  P-E, the second sub-market considered is the DA-TD-P-AE sub-market of the integrated
                                  balancing and congestion management market which takes place DA and includes bids
                                  from resources from transmission and distribution grids (TD). From the northern demon-
                                  strator, the sub-markets described in this paper are the LT-TD-P-AE, the ID-TD-P-E, and
                                  the NRT-TD-P-E.
                                        For brevity, only the application of the most significant pillars is discussed in this paper;
                                  details can be found in OneNet deliverable 3.1 [42] and updated in OneNet Deliverable
                                  11.2. Table 2 describes the three selected sub-markets in terms of the features and attributes
                                  defined by the corresponding TMF pillar outlining the structural aspects that characterize
                                  the selected sub-markets pointing out similarities and differences.
                                        As shown in Table 2, all sub-markets are auction markets in which active power activa-
                                  tion is procured to address different operational issues. The three sub-markets encompass
                                  different market areas considering the power system (i.e., distribution, transmission, and
                                  distribution and transmission), buyers, sellers’ participation, and market operators (MO).
                                  While in the Polish demonstrator, the MO role is assigned to the relevant SO, in the case of
                                  the northern sub-market, the MO role can be assigned to the TSO, DSO, or an independent
                                  MO if available in the sub-market area. It is worth mentioning that discussing the role
                                  assignment task performed by the demonstrators is out of this paper’s scope. Table 3 shows
                                  the TMF application to the linkages between the sub-markets that form one market architec-
                                  ture through the features of the market optimization and sub-markets coordination pillars.
                                  More specifically, it describes the linkage between the Polish demonstrator’s sub-markets
                                  and the linkage between the northern demonstrator’s sub-markets described in this paper.

                                  Table 3. TMF sub-market linkage applied to OneNet demonstrators.

                                                                                           Northern              Northern
                                                          Polish Demonstrator
                                                                                          Demonstrator          Demonstrator
                                          A                   DA-D-P-E                   Intraday energy          ID-TD-P-E
        Sub-markets
                                          B                   DA-TD-P-E                     ID-TD-P-E            NRT-TD-P-E
                                                       Market optimization pillar
     Feature: Market optimization methodology                Decentralized                 Centralized           Centralized
                  Feature: Sub-markets
                                                               Sequential                 Simultaneous            Sequential
                  optimization strategy
                                                     Sub-markets coordination pillar
                                                                  Yes                           Yes
         Feature:               Forwarding of bids        (only for frequency          (only for congestion          Yes
  Allocation principle of                                       control)                   management)
        flexibility                                           Conditional                   Conditional
                               Commitment to bid
                                                          (forwarded bids are          (bids with locational       Formal
                                  selection
                                                              aggregated)                  information)
                                     System
                                                            Priority for DSO               No Priority           No Priority
                                 operators order


                                       Considering the market optimization pillar, the Polish demonstrator’s sub-markets in
                                  Table 3 show a decentralized optimization methodology since the procurement of system
                                  services is addressed first at the local level, prioritizing the DSO. On the contrary, the
                                  sub-markets of the northern demonstrator are characterized by a centralized procurement
                                  of system services. Concerning the optimization methodology, the two Polish sub-markets
                                  are optimized (i.e., cleared) sequentially; conversely, the northern demonstrator’s sub-
                                  markets are simultaneously optimized. Considering the sub-market optimization pillar,
                                  the feature concerning the overall allocation principle of flexibility is discussed. In the
                                  Polish demonstrator’s sub-markets, the bids are forwarded from the local market (DA-
Energies 2023, 16, 6939                                                                                            14 of 28




                          D-P-E) to the national one (DA-D-P-E). In the latter, the forwarded bids can only be
                          used for energy balancing services. The commitment to bid selection is conditional since
                          the bids are forwarded in an aggregated way with a prior distribution grid constraint
                          check. The aggregated bids represent a balancing offer at the TSO–DSO coupling point
                          that does not endanger the operation of the DSO network. As described in Table 3, the
                          Polish demonstrator’s sub-markets linkage prioritizes the DSO in allocating flexibility.
                          Moreover, Table 3 shows that the sub-markets linkage in the northern demonstrator’s
                          market architecture regards the intraday energy market and the short-term congestion
                          management market (ID-TD-P-E). A centralized market optimization methodology is
                          adopted while the two sub-markets are simultaneously optimized. The ID-TD-P-E and NRT-
                          TD-P-E sub-markets linkage is characterized by a sequential optimization strategy since
                          the ID-TD-P-E closes before forwarding the leftover bids to the NRT-TD-P-E submarket.
                          Considering the sub-market coordination pillar, the bids submitted to the intraday energy
                          market are also made available for the ID-TD-P-E sub-market if they include locational
                          information. Consequently, those bids can also be used for congestion management in
                          addition to those already submitted to the ID-TD-P-E sub-market only. Hence, the intraday
                          energy market and the ID-TD-P-E sub-market share a set of bids: the former is a continuous
                          trading market, while the latter is an auction market with a GCT of 2 h ahead of the
                          activation time. In this case, bid forwarding is conditional since it requires the bids to
                          include locational information, the grid constraints compliance check, and a checking
                          process involving the market platforms to ensure the uniqueness of bid selection among the
                          sub-markets and avoid double clearing. The bid forwarding that links the ID-TD-P-E and
                          NRT-TD-P-E sub-markets is formal since no procedures are required to transfer the bids
                          across the sub-markets. The in-depth analysis of the formal and conditional bid forwarding
                          characteristics for the analyzed market architectures is out of this paper’s scope and is part
                          of further research within the OneNet project in OneNet Deliverables 3.3 and 11.2.
                                Regarding the overall allocation principle of flexibility between the intraday energy
                          and the ID-TD-P-E sub-market, the linkage features in Table 3 show no priority or exclusiv-
                          ity for TSO or DSO. Tables 2 and 3 prove the TMF capability to capture the characteristics
                          of the sub-markets delivering a concise but comprehensive market aspects description.
                          Moreover, the TMF adoption allows for an effective comparative analysis of different sub-
                          markets. In particular, the analysis based on the TMF allows observing the OneNet market
                          architectures from different dimensions: time allocation of flexibility, buyer allocation of
                          flexibility, and TSO–DSO interaction level.
                                Overall, the two demonstrators’ market architectures described in this paper differ de-
                          spite the common ambition of achieving liquid markets for system services. Implementing
                          specific design choices depends on the specific ambitions and boundary conditions [38].
                          Both demonstrators aim to achieve a high level of liquidity thanks to the market scope and
                          trading volume. It is worth nothing that, as stated in [43] the liquidity concept is slippery
                          and elusive, mainly because it includes a number of transactional properties of the market.
                          In [44] in financial markets, liquidity considers three dimensions: tightness, depth and
                          resiliency. Tightness refers to the cost of turning a position over a short time; it is referred
                          to transaction costs and usually measured with the bid-ask spread. Depth refers to the
                          size that the bid order flow requires to change prices. Resiliency indicates the speed at
                          which prices recover from shocks. Therefore, if positions in the market can be changed
                          with small changes in prices and prices can be recovered from shocks then the market are
                          called liquid. High trading volumes and competition can contribute to high liquidity levels.
                          The demonstrators unlock DERs’ potential by creating multiple business opportunities
                          for DERs. The northern demonstrator aims to integrate local and national markets in one
                          cross-border market architecture involving multiple TSOs and DSOs. Therefore, DERs will
                          provide system services to multiple system operators to solve cross-border needs. The
                          Polish demonstrator aims to enhance the TSO–DSO cooperation at the national level by
                          enabling DERs to support the power system operation. Participation in the balancing
                          market contributes to increase the liquidity in local markets.
Energies 2023, 16, 6939                                                                                                       15 of 28




                                       It is worth noting that in the OneNet demonstration activities, to avoid interfering with
                                  the existing electricity market functioning, the Polish demonstrator considers an emulated
                                  integrated balancing and congestion management market, while the northern demonstrator
                                  considers an emulated intraday energy market. However, the analysis presented in this
                                  paper conceptually extends the boundaries determined by the limits imposed on the
                                  demonstration activities that, by definition, have demonstrative scope.
                                       The TMF assists in evaluating and comparing market design choices which insights
                                  can inform policy decisions, guide market reforms, or shape the development of new
                                  market architectures. Table 4 resumes and compares the OneNet Polish and northern
                                  demonstrators market designs based on the TMF pillars.

                                  Table 4. Comparison of the TMF application to the OneNet Polish and northern demonstrators
                                  considering the TMF pillars.

                                                       Polish Demonstrator                         Northern Demonstrator
                                             Multi-layered TSO–DSO market                  Common TSO–DSO market architecture
                                             architecture for congestion management        characterized by service-agnostic
          Entire market architecture         and                                           products for congestion management and
                                             voltage control with active power             frequency control with active power
                                             activation products.                          activation and availability products.
                                                                                           Bids from intraday energy markets can be
                                             Forwarding of bids from local to national
                                                                                           forwarded to other markets if bids
                   Sub-market                market with priority to DSO for flexibility
                                                                                           include locational information and pass
                  coordination               allocation. Bid forwarding considers
                                                                                           grid constraints check. No priority to
                                             aggregation with grid constraint check.
                                                                                           TSO or DSO for flexibility allocation.
                                             Decentralized optimization with               Centralized market optimization and
                                             sequential strategy. The local market         simultaneous markets optimization. Bid
                    Market
                                             (DA-D-P-E) has priority, bids may be          sharing between intraday energy market
                  optimization
                                             forwarded to the national level               and other sub-markets, given certain
                                             (DA-TD-P-AE).                                 conditions.
                                             Day-ahead operational procedures with
                                                                                           From long-term to near-real-time, with
                     Market                  specific auction mechanisms for
                                                                                           auction mechanisms for multiple
                    operation                congestion management and voltage
                                                                                           services.
                                             control.
                                                                                           Bids including locational information are
                                             Grid constraints check at the DSO level
                                                                                           checked for grid constraints compliance.
                      Grid                   with detailed representation of grid.
                                                                                           Moreover, bid forwarding and selection
                 representation              Forwarded bids undergo aggregation
                                                                                           checks the uniqueness of bids among
                                             considering DSO grid constraints.
                                                                                           sub-markets to prevent double clearing


                                       Overall, the Polish demonstrator’s design offers a localized approach with multiple
                                  layers and DSO priority, which might be more suitable for regions with distinct local
                                  challenges but may face sub-optimal allocation of resources when integrating with broader
                                  grids. While the northern demonstrator’s design which could be more efficient for regions
                                  aiming for wider grid integration but that might overlook specific local needs. The modular
                                  approach of the Polish demonstrator design has a reduced need for data sharing between
                                  TSO and DSOs and implementation complexity. The northern demonstrator presents an
                                  integrated design that requires joint TSO–DSO operations and increased data sharing
                                  requirements.

                                  4. Real-World Challenges of Implementing TSO–DSO Market-Based Coordination
                                       In OneNet project activities, the TMF application has supported and encouraged
                                  market design through an iterative process. Furthermore, the application of the TMF to the
                                  OneNet demonstrators, thanks to the process of translating the demonstration activities
                                  into the TMF-based description by checking every feature that forms the TMF pillars (see
                                  Section 3.1), allowed us to identify the challenges for the real-world implementation of
                                  a market architecture devoted to system service procurement. In fact, each TMF feature
Energies 2023, 16, 6939                                                                                            16 of 28




                          represents a design aspect to be defined when devising a market architecture; these design
                          aspects are not independent; mutual influence exists, as noticeable in the discussion in
                          this section. The TMF application points out similarities and differences among the dif-
                          ferent market architectures proposed in OneNet. The process described in Section 3.1 of
                          formalizing the market architectures according to the TMF pillars and features led us to
                          discover a non-exhaustive (and non-prioritized) set of real-world challenges concerning the
                          design of integrated TSO–DSO markets. Basically, each TMF feature has different options;
                          in the addressed market design and analysis process, the pros and cons of the different
                          solutions are assessed, leading to the identification of the challenges that characterize the
                          deployment of TSO–DSO market-based coordination in the real world. Adopting the TMF
                          allows identifying all necessary dimensions and features for electricity market design, by
                          providing a comprehensive overview of the possible options the TMF supports market
                          design to avoid incoherent choices and highlights the impacts of the trade-off choices
                          allowing mitigating market distortions and inefficiencies.
                                This section focuses on the outcome of the TMF application to the OneNet demon-
                          strators by discussing the challenges identified thanks to the analysis of the TMF features.
                          Moreover, the solutions proposed within the OneNet project to address the identified
                          challenges are presented. The presented outcome has been possible thanks to the high fre-
                          quency and great variety of interactions and consultation moments among the stakeholders
                          and the variety of market architectures proposed by the OneNet demonstrators that cover
                          different system service needs.
                                The research activities described in this paper point out that one of the main concerns
                          related to system service procurement is achieving a satisfactory level of participation
                          that gives TSOs and DSOs certainty on service providers’ reliability at competitive costs.
                          This aspect represents the main real-world challenge for market-based mechanisms for
                          procuring system services. Solving this challenge requires devising mechanisms that
                          guarantee liquidity and a high level of competition. This paper adopts a generalized
                          liquidity definition, a mechanism is “liquid” if the price related to the sellers’ willingness
                          to sell is close to the price related to the buyers’ willingness to buy, and the quantity offered
                          is enough to satisfy the need of the buyer(s) [45]. Moreover, we consider a mechanism
                          “competitive” if the participation of buyers and sellers determines final prices that reflect the
                          marginal costs related to the product provision [46]. The achievement of satisfactory levels
                          of liquidity and competition represents a challenge that can be addressed by considering
                          the different design choices pointed out by the TMF.

                          4.1. Challenges Related to the Design of Market Architecture Structural Aspects
                               The ‘entire market architecture’ pillar, through the features ‘number of sub-markets’,
                          ‘timing of sub-markets’, and ‘locational granularity’, concerns structural aspects such as
                          the temporal and spatial dimensions that influence the market architecture’s liquidity and
                          competition. In terms of temporal dimension, a large market window increases the chance
                          of more FSPs participating. Similarly, considering the spatial dimension, a larger market
                          area allows for encompassing more FSPs. As observed in the context of OneNet, setting-up
                          the number and the spatial and temporal dimensions of the sub-markets is a market design
                          challenge since no solution of general validity exists; market design has to identify the
                          best-case specific compromising solutions. The OneNet demonstrators described in this
                          paper address this challenge by pursuing an expanded spatial dimension for the market.
                          The northern demonstrator considers a market area that includes several countries. Due to
                          bid forwarding, the Polish demonstrator forwards the products offered in the local markets
                          to the national level. Considering the temporal dimension, both demonstrators exploit a
                          short-term procurement for the sub-markets described in this paper; hence, the contribution
                          of this design aspect to liquidity and competition is limited.
                               The ‘service’ and ‘product’ TMF features highlight the market design challenge con-
                          cerning the optimal compromise between standardized service-agnostic and dedicated
                          products. Product standardization and substitutability influence the liquidity and competi-
Energies 2023, 16, 6939                                                                                           17 of 28




                          tion achieved by the market. A standardized or harmonized product definition enhances
                          market interoperability, hence liquidity and competition. Moreover, these aspects are also
                          strengthened if the same product can be exploited to solve the different system needs of
                          both TSOs and DSOs. However, the benefits of increased harmonization and standardiza-
                          tion of flexibility products should be compared to the advantages that tailored product
                          features might have to address local needs. The demonstrators described in this paper
                          address this challenge similarly by considering service-agnostic products instead of service-
                          specific products; this influences the number of sub-markets in the market architecture and
                          increases liquidity since different system service needs are solved using the same product.
                          Moreover, cross-border and cross-SO markets are enabled in the northern demonstrator
                          due to the achieved product interoperability.
                               Interoperability of products across markets and SOs poses a challenge related to
                          defining boundaries for the activity of the different actors to avoid inefficiencies and
                          conflicts. This challenge is related to the ‘market roles and actors’ TMF feature. The
                          northern demonstrator addresses this challenge by involving an IMO for the common TSO
                          and DSO markets. The Polish demonstrator addresses this challenge differently by adopting
                          separate markets for TSOs and DSOs and establishing technical rules for aggregating the
                          bids forwarded from the DSO market (DA-D-P-E) to the TSO one (DA-TD-P-E).

                          4.2. Challenges Related to Sub-Market Coordination Aspects
                                The TMF ‘sub-market coordination’ pillar points out the design aspects to address the
                          challenges for achieving effective coordination among the sub-markets and then among
                          TSOs and DSOs for procuring system services from the same pool of FSPs. The ‘allocation
                          principle of flexibility’ feature highlights the market design challenge of allowing TSO–DSO
                          coordination for procuring system services from the same pool of resources by avoiding
                          inefficiencies, conflictive overlapping, and gaming. The optimal allocation of resources
                          and products between sub-markets leads to an efficient market architecture; an effective
                          allocation of flexibility across sub-markets can be achieved by devising a sub-markets’ time
                          sequence that avoids conflictive overlapping and room for gaming (e.g., creating artificial
                          congestions by overbidding in one market to be called in another one). Moreover, market
                          operational processes such as bid forwarding represent a valuable measure to distribute
                          the available resources across the sub-markets. However, it has to be carefully designed to
                          enhance market liquidity and competition by avoiding technical issues between TSO and
                          DSO (e.g., conflictive activation) and gaming (e.g., artificial congestion due to overbidding).
                          The northern demonstrator deals with the challenge of effectively allocating flexibility
                          among sub-markets by defining bid forwarding from the intraday energy sub-market to
                          the ID-TD-P-E sub-market for the bids that embed locational information. Differently, the
                          Polish demonstrator defines aggregation rules at the TSO/DSO interface before bid for-
                          warding from the local (DA-D-P-E) sub-market to the integrating balancing and congestion
                          management sub-markets.
                                Overall, the allocation of flexibility among sub-markets defines the priorities in the
                          TSO–DSO coordination. In common markets (northern demonstrator), no priority nor
                          exclusivity is pre-established but rather overall economic efficiency. While in the multi-level
                          market model adopted by the Polish demonstrator, the DSO prioritizes the allocation of
                          the flexibility available from the same pool of resources. In terms of economic efficiency,
                          this option can lead to sub-optimal results considering the overall national power system.
                          However, the multi-level market model is less complex, leading to lower implementation
                          costs and time and better suits local conditions due to the higher granularity (e.g., it allows
                          adopting smaller bid size, less demanding ramps, and tailored market clearing timeframes).
                                The ‘timeframe for coordination’ feature regards the efficient resource allocation by
                          considering the design aspects related to the coordination of the market phases from pre-
                          qualification to settlement that the sub-market can share (e.g., the prequalification process
                          can be addressed once for all sub-markets, settlement coordination across sub-markets can
                          avoid unnecessary cash flows). This feature highlights a market design challenge since the
Energies 2023, 16, 6939                                                                                           18 of 28




                          overall market efficiency is enhanced if duplication of procedures across sub-markets is
                          avoided; however, a dedicated process may be preferred in some cases to address pecu-
                          liarities and specific needs (e.g., a sub-market may require very restrictive prequalification
                          procedures that are not necessary for participating to the other sub-markets). In addition,
                          in this case, a solution of general validity does not exist; identifying the solution that best
                          fits is a market design challenge. The solutions developed by the OneNet demonstrators
                          concern the prequalification phase coordination to decrease the barriers to FSPs market par-
                          ticipation. The definition of a common procedure for prequalification has been discussed
                          to find a compromise among the requirements of the different parties involved (i.e., TSOs,
                          DSOs, and MOs) and define a shared flexibility register; further information is available
                          in [41]. Cross-country prequalification procedures are also proposed and demonstrated in
                          OneNet.

                          4.3. Challenges Related to Market Optimization Design Aspects
                               The challenges related to the ‘market optimization’ pillar concern the overall pro-
                          curement economic efficiency, the flexibility allocation among sub-markets, the TSO–DSO
                          coordination timing and information exchange, and the market gaming risk. The ‘market
                          optimization methodology’ feature highlights the market design challenge of adopting a
                          centralized or decentralized optimization methodology (i.e., common TSO–DSO model
                          or disjoint DSO and TSO markets), which choice determines the requirements in terms
                          of timing and content of TSO–DSO coordination and the related requirements for infor-
                          mation and corresponding data availability concerning grid representation and power
                          flow calculation. The ‘submarket optimization strategy’ feature regards the market design
                          challenge of activating the FSPs considering the effect on the overall system operation
                          costs (e.g., solving a local network congestion may create a power imbalance that requires
                          an expensive countermeasure). This feature’s choices influence the overall economic ef-
                          ficiency achieved; moreover, they have an implication on the countermeasures to avoid
                          double procurements and discourage gaming. The northern and Polish demonstrators
                          address these challenges differently. The northern demonstrator defines a centralized
                          procurement where local operational issues can be solved by activating bids with locational
                          information. In this case, the central and local needs are simultaneously addressed and the
                          TSO–DSO coordination is embedded in the market clearing, preventing the need for addi-
                          tional countermeasures and double procurements. However, this design choice increases
                          the requirement for grid representation and network information sharing among TSOs
                          and DSOs. The Polish demonstrator proposes a decentralized procurement characterized
                          by a sequential optimization strategy in which the local needs are solved first; then, the
                          central needs are addressed with the contribution of the forwarded aggregated leftover
                          bids. The TSO–DSO coordination is embedded in the bid aggregation rules since the DSO
                          checks the FSPs activation to avoid distribution network constraint violation. In the Polish
                          demonstrator, double procurement is avoided by designing a decentralized and sequential
                          optimization in which a local market is solved before a central market in which DER bids
                          are submitted in an aggregated way if there are local market leftovers. This design choice
                          is characterized by a lower requirement for grid representation and network information
                          sharing among TSOs and DSOs. However, sub-markets decentralized optimization may
                          lead to sub-optimal solutions in terms of overall economic efficiency.

                          4.4. Challenges Related to Market Operation Design Aspects
                               Regarding the ‘market operation’ pillar design choices, the main challenges concern-
                          ing the effectiveness of the remuneration scheme (related to the ‘remuneration scheme’
                          feature), the coordination of availability and activation procurement from FSPs (related
                          to the ‘remuneration of the product attribute’ feature) and the corresponding timing for
                          procurement (related ‘procurement frequency’ features), and the cost-effectiveness of the
                          market related to the ‘market-clearing type’ feature choices are discussed in this section.
Energies 2023, 16, 6939                                                                                           19 of 28




                                 Considering the ‘remuneration scheme’ feature, the OneNet demonstrators alterna-
                          tively propose pay-as-bid and pay-as-cleared for remunerating similar products. The
                          market design challenge identified by this choice relates to the impact on market efficiency;
                          in-depth research involving real-world demonstrators is needed to identify the factors
                          relevant to the local and central electricity market that can lead to the design of effective
                          case-specific solutions. The ‘remuneration of the product attribute’ feature leads to the
                          market design challenge of setting up, or not, an availability sub-market related to an
                          activation sub-market to enhance the overall liquidity and competition in providing the
                          related system service. Setting up availability and activation sub-markets increases the
                          temporal dimension for procurement and increases the confidence of TSOs and DSOs
                          towards the availability of FSPs. However, no solutions of general validity exist and the
                          most suitable timeframe for procuring flexibility has to be found depending on the system
                          service need and context [38]. This aspect also influences the temporal size of the market; as
                          pointed out by the ‘procurement frequency’ feature, timeframes can vary from year ahead
                          until near-real-time. As observed while analyzing the OneNet demonstrators, TSOs, DSOs,
                          and FSPs may have a conflictive perspective since SOs may prefer, in some situations, to
                          procure flexibility at time frames closer to service delivery (e.g., when more information on
                          the system conditions is available), while FSPs may prefer to be informed long in advance
                          (i.e., to reschedule the core business activities optimally). However, in other scenarios,
                          SOs may prefer to procure system services long in advance (e.g., in the case of planned
                          maintenance), while FSPs would prefer to commit the system service provision closer to
                          the time of delivery (e.g., to decrease the burden of forecasting generation or load patterns).
                          In the OneNet project, the challenges related to identifying the most suitable correlation
                          between availability and activation markets and timing of system service procurement
                          are addressed by proposing and testing, thanks to a large number of demonstrators, a
                          great variety of solutions. However, the analysis of the obtained outcome has to consider
                          the impact of the initial and local conditions and the specific demonstrator’s objective, as
                          reflected in the differences among the OneNet demonstrators. The ‘market-clearing type’
                          feature concerns the market design challenge of adopting a continuous trading or a discrete
                          auction scheme. The design choice is case-specific and has to be based on the need for
                          designing the markets, finding a compromise between the timing with respect to the time
                          of service delivery and the cost-effectiveness.

                          4.5. Challenges Related to Grid Representation in the Market Architecture
                                Electricity markets have to deal with power system network constraints; how and in
                          which phase to include the grid representation in the market architecture represents an open
                          challenge for integrated TSO–DSO markets pointed out by the ‘grid representation’ TMF
                          pillar. The grid representation comprehensiveness has implications on the grid information
                          availability, computational requirement for power flow calculation, data exchange timing
                          requirements, and cyber security and data privacy issues related to network and user data
                          gathering, storage, and sharing among the different stakeholders such as TSOs and DSOs.
                          The ‘representation of grid constraints’ feature deals with the market design challenge of
                          achieving an adequate level of comprehensiveness for the grid representation. Different
                          levels of comprehensiveness for the grid representation can be exploited, influencing the
                          compliance of the market-clearing results with grid constraints and the need for further
                          corrective procedures to ensure the feasibility of the final market result. Moreover, the
                          ‘timing of grid constraints inclusion’ feature highlights the market design challenge of
                          identifying the market phases to embed the network with the service procurement (i.e.,
                          definition of procurement areas, prequalification, procurement, monitoring, activation, and
                          settlement). Achieving a satisfactory level of techno-economic effectiveness is a market
                          design challenge since identifying the most effective level of comprehensiveness for grid
                          representation in the different market phases for integrated TSO–DSO markets is case-
                          specific and depends on the perspective of the involved actors and relevant stakeholders.
                          The challenges related to the grid representation pillar will be further investigated in
Energies 2023, 16, 6939                                                                                                         20 of 28




                                    OneNet project activities. The northern demonstrator aims to address this challenge
                                    by relying on comprehensive grid data and detailed power flow analysis; the Polish
                                    demonstrator exploits partial grid data (i.e., sensitivity indicators) and DSO grid constraints
                                    check for bid aggregation before forwarding.

                                    4.6. Analysis of Challenges and Recommendations across the Analyzed Demonstrators
                                         The analysis of the northern and Polish demonstrators highlights common themes such
                                    as the importance of effective TSO–DSO coordination, product standardization, and the
                                    grid representation challenges. Considering the two demonstrators whose TMF application
                                    is described in Section 3, both the Polish and northern OneNet demonstrators address
                                    distinct challenges in market design, offering valuable insights into crafting efficient and
                                    responsive energy markets. Table 5 lists the main market design challenges by highlighting
                                    the specific demonstrator’s challenge and the corresponding solution adopted.

                                    Table 5. Comparative analysis of challenges, recommendations, and solutions from the Polish and
                                    northern OneNet demonstrators.

                    Market
                    Design                             Demonstrator’s Challenge                    Demonstrator’s Solution
                   Challenge
                                                                                            In Polish demonstrator prioritization is
                                                The Polish demonstrator aims at
                                                                                            given to local markets, with flexibility
                                                enhancing TSO–DSO cooperation at the
                                                                                            allocations from local markets to national
                                                national level. The complexity arises in
                                                                                            ones. Decentralized optimization to
                                                achieving an efficient multi-layered
                                                                                            ensure local constraints are accounted for
                                                TSO–DSO structure.
                     Market                                                                 before scaling to a national perspective.
                   Integration                  The northern demonstrator seeks to          The northern demonstrator adopted a
                                                integrate local and national markets in     common TSO–DSO market architecture,
                                                one cross-border architecture involving     integrating both TSO and DSO as buyers
                                                multiple TSOs and DSOs. The complexity      in a single coordination platform that
                                                here is in managing interactions across     realizes a centralized market
                                                borders.                                    optimization.
                                                For the Polish demonstrator: ensuring       Polish demonstrator solution: unlock
                                                market liquidity while focusing primarily   DERs’ potential by creating multiple
                                                on local markets and TSO–DSO                business opportunities with value staking
                                                interactions at the national level.         from the local to the national level.
              Liquidity and DERs
                                                                                            For the northern demonstrator: a
                 participation
                                                                                            common TSO–DSO market, ensuring all
                                                For the northern demonstrator: ensuring
                                                                                            stakeholders, regardless of region,
                                                market liquidity with cross-border
                                                                                            operate on a single platform unlocking
                                                markets integration.
                                                                                            cross-border and cross-service market
                                                                                            participation.
                                                                                            Polish demonstrator: sequential
                                                For both Polish and northern                optimization and forwarding of bids
                                                demonstrators: ensure adequate              from local to national markets, with
               Ensuring proper                                                              prioritization for DSOs.
                                                coordination between sub-markets that
            allocation of flexibility
                                                realizes a proper flow and prioritization   Northern demonstrator: centralized
                                                of bids and optimizes flexibility           optimization with shared bids between
                                                allocation.                                 sub-markets without TSO or DSO
                                                                                            priority.
Energies 2023, 16, 6939                                                                                                   21 of 28




                                Table 5. Cont.

                    Market
                    Design                         Demonstrator’s Challenge                   Demonstrator’s Solution
                   Challenge
                                                                                       Polish demonstrator: bid filtering and
                                            For both Polish and northern               aggregation at DSO level with grid
                                            demonstrators: with increasing             constraints check before bid forwarding
                 Maintaining                distributed energy resources               to the TSO market.
           grid security with DERs          participating in the market, maintaining   Northern demonstrator: flexibility
                                            the security of the electricity supply     register with prequalification to ensure
                                            becomes more complex.                      grid constraints are respected and the
                                                                                       uniqueness of bid selection among the
                                                                                       sub-markets avoiding double clearing.

                                4.7. Policy Recommendations and Insights Emerged from the Applicationof the TMF
                                     Applying the TMF provides a structured and systematic approach to understanding
                                and designing market architectures. Hence, the TMF offers a framework that policymakers
                                can leverage to derive specific, actionable insights for policy formulation. More specifically,
                                the TMF analysis supports policymakers in identifying systemic and specific challenges
                                in market design (e.g., the trade-offs between centralized vs. decentralized procurement
                                mechanisms, the extent of grid representation required, or the intricacies of TSO–DSO
                                coordination) that allow formulating policies that set clear guidelines.
                                     Applying the TMF to the OneNet demonstrators sheds light on factors influencing
                                market liquidity and competition, such as product interoperability, spatial and temporal
                                dimensions of sub-markets, and a coordinated allocation of available flexibility. As a
                                practical implementation, the policies may promote product standardization across markets
                                or mandate service-agnostic products. Similarly, guidelines setting coherent spatial and
                                temporal dimensions of sub-markets to ensure their coordination and promote value
                                staking for system service providers to foster higher participation and better competition,
                                as highlighted by the OneNet demonstrators in which the TMF description of market
                                features supports establishing coherent temporal coordination across energy markets,
                                ensuring consistency in auction timings, bid submission deadlines, and settlement periods.
                                     The TMF application underlines the challenge of identifying the level of grid repre-
                                sentation in market architecture depending on the adopted market design requirements.
                                To address this challenge, considering the features of the adopted market architecture,
                                policymakers can set standards on grid data collection, storage, and sharing, ensuring that
                                while grid representation is comprehensive, it is also operationally viable.
                                     The application of the TMF promoted the use of precise and common market nomen-
                                clatures and definitions, easing the interaction of the relevant stakeholders in the demon-
                                strators and facilitating the market design process. The TMF for the OneNet demonstrators
                                support facilitated a comprehensive market description. TMF’s method of providing a de-
                                tailed, structured breakdown of market interactions, from individual buyer–seller dynamics
                                to broader market architectures, offers a blueprint for comprehensive market analysis. The
                                TFM supports policymakers in promoting standardized market definitions and nomencla-
                                tures, ensuring clarity and minimizing ambiguities across regional markets. Moreover, TMF
                                provides policymakers with a systematic framework to base stakeholder consultations.
                                     Each analyzed demonstrator offers unique insights into how these challenges can be
                                approached, the diversity of possible solutions allows appreciating the need for adaptability
                                in policy design. However, several common broad themes relevant to policy-making can
                                be identified from the OneNet demonstrator analysis.
                                     Emphasize TSO–DSO Coordination: Effective coordination between TSOs and DSOs is
                                pivotal. Regardless of the method, the importance of TSO–DSO synergy cannot
                                be understated.
                                     Clear Definitions and Nomenclature: Given the intricacies involved, especially with
                                diverse stakeholders interacting, maintaining a clear database of definitions and nomencla-
Energies 2023, 16, 6939                                                                                          22 of 28




                          ture is essential. This ensures consistent communication, reduces ambiguities, and aids in
                          the smooth implementation of market mechanisms.
                               Robust Technology and Data Management: Bid forwarding, grid constraints checks,
                          and ensuring bid uniqueness across sub-markets are critical processes that require robust
                          technological solutions. Investing in data management and technological platforms will
                          streamline operations and ensure market efficiency.
                               Scalability vs. Specificity: While the northern demonstrator leans towards a broader,
                          more-integrated approach (cross-border markets), the Polish demonstrator focuses on a
                          more localized approach, tailoring solutions to the specific needs of regions. Both are valid,
                          emphasizing that market design should be adapted to specific ambitions and regional con-
                          ditions. This trade-off between scalability and specificity is a key insight for policymakers.
                               Interoperability vs. Complexity: The northern demonstrator’s emphasis on product
                          interoperability suggests a vision for a more interconnected European energy market. How-
                          ever, the Polish approach, which separates TSO and DSO markets, points out that simplicity
                          can sometimes be preferred on integration, especially when dealing with complex systems.
                               Adaptive Design: Both demonstrators provide valuable insights into the need for a
                          flexible design for market architectures. While standardization and harmonization are
                          crucial, structures must be adapted to local conditions and needs.

                          5. Conclusions
                                This paper contributes to the power system evolution by addressing the perspective
                          of integrating markets for system service products (also known as flexibility markets) into
                          the electricity market architecture. The proposed TMF is an instrument to guide market
                          design activities. Furthermore, the TMF supports policymakers in identifying challenges,
                          barriers, and gaps that characterize a particular electricity market architecture. The TMF
                          is a descriptive tool to analyze the market-based TSO–DSO coordination and a valuable
                          prescriptive tool to guide market design and integration. It represents a single tool to
                          describe the great variety of TSO–DSO markets by using fundamental parameters and
                          aspects for designing coordinated and integrated markets. The TMF supports market
                          analysts and designers by pointing out a comprehensive set of categories with possible
                          choices that need to be made while devising an electricity market architecture.
                                This paper describes the application of the TMF to support the real-world demon-
                          strators of the OneNet project, proving the TMF’s capability in delivering a systematic
                          description of the fundamental market design aspects of the TSO–DSO coordination. The
                          adoption of the TMF supported and encouraged the market design, engaging the electricity
                          actors in the demonstrators (TSOs, DSOs, and IMOs). Therefore, adopting the TMF is
                          beneficial for the electricity market designers since its concise but comprehensive structure
                          eases the communication on market concepts and market design.
                                Furthermore, applying the TMF to the OneNet demonstrators allowed us to identify a
                          set of challenges for the real-world implementation of market-based TSO–DSO coordination
                          devoted to system service procurement. The dimension of the OneNet project favored
                          reaching this outcome since the great variety of scenarios and involved actors led to
                          diverse demonstrators. The application of the TMF points out similarities and differences
                          among the proposed market architectures. This paper presents the analysis of the solutions
                          adopted by the OneNet demonstrators to address the identified challenges and, on this
                          basis, delivers recommendations on the possible design choices whose beneficiaries are
                          TSOs, DSOs, MOs, regulatory bodies, and policy decision-makers.
                                The analysis of the identified challenges highlights that “one solution does not fill
                          all”; depending on the context, the same service need can be solved by adopting different
                          TSO–DSO market design choices. The application of the TMF supports market-efficiency
                          assessment by providing a general framework that harmonizes concepts useful also for a
                          broader market assessment that complements quantitative market-efficiency evaluation.
                          On the one hand, the TMF offers a systematic approach that comprehensively dissects
                          complex market architectures, reducing potential biases. It allows categorizing markets
Energies 2023, 16, 6939                                                                                                  23 of 28




                          into TSO–DSO-Customer models, ensuring both macro- and micro-level analyses. The
                          standardized nature of the TMF enables easier comparisons of different market architectures
                          and clearer communication between stakeholders. It aids in pinpointing specific areas of
                          concern, promoting an iterative approach to market design that remains relevant over time.
                          Furthermore, the TMF is adaptable to various market structures, showcasing its versatility.
                               On the other hand, the TMF’s detailed nature might be challenging for those unfamiliar
                          with electricity market topics. While it aims to be comprehensive, it might sometimes
                          miss out on specific nuances, suggesting a need for regular updates. The framework is
                          resource-intensive, demanding both expertise and time, and its effectiveness relies on
                          accurate and detailed information. Though the TMF emphasizes qualitative assessments, a
                          subsequent step involving quantitative analysis becomes crucial to ensure the efficiency of
                          the designed market.
                               Further research will focus on an in-depth analysis of the identified challenges related
                          to market integration and harmonization and assessing the proposed solutions. Moreover,
                          quantitative approaches to assess market functioning will be developed based on the TMF
                          qualitative modeling of the market architecture designs.

                          Author Contributions: Conceptualization, M.T., J.P.C.Á., C.D.S., H.G. and G.W.; methodology, M.T.,
                          J.P.C.Á., C.D.S., H.G. and G.W.; formal analysis, M.T., C.D.S. and G.W.; investigation, M.T., C.D.S.
                          and G.W.; validation, J.P.C.Á., H.G. and G.W.; resources, M.T. and C.D.S.; data curation, M.T.;
                          writing—original draft, M.T. and G.W.; writing—review and editing; J.P.C.Á., C.D.S., H.G. and G.W.;
                          visualization, M.T. and G.W.; supervision, J.P.C.Á. and H.G.; project administration J.P.C.Á., C.D.S.
                          and H.G.; funding acquisition, J.P.C.Á. and H.G. All authors have read and agreed to the published
                          version of the manuscript.
                          Funding: This research has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and
                          innovation programme under grant agreement No 957739 (OneNet project).
                          Data Availability Statement: 3rd Party Data. Restrictions apply to the availability of these data. Data
                          were obtained from OneNet project partners and are available https://onenet-project.eu/ (accessed
                          on 29 June 2021). with the permission of OneNet project consortium.
                          Acknowledgments: The authors express sincere gratitude to the partners from the OneNet demon-
                          strators for their continued support in the activities that led to this paper.
                          Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

                          Abbreviations

                          aFRR              automatic frequency restoration reserves
                          CS                coordination schemes
                          D                 distribution network
                          DA                day-ahead
                          DSO               distribution system operator
                          FCR               frequency containment reserves
                          FSP               flexible service provider
                          GCT               gate closure time
                          H2020             Horizon 2020
                          HV                high voltage
                          ID                intraday
                          IMO               independent market operator
                          LT                long-term
                          LV                low voltage
                          mFRR              manual frequency restoration reserves
                          MO                market operator
                          MV                medium voltage
                          NRT               near-real-time
Energies 2023, 16, 6939                                                                                                                          24 of 28




                                     P                  active power
                                     Q                  reactive power
                                     RES                renewable energy source
                                     SO                 system operator
                                     ST                 short-term
                                     T                  transmission network
                                     TMF                theoretical market framework
                                     TSO                transmission system operator
                                     V/I                voltage or current

                                     Appendix A
       Energies 2023, 16, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                           25 of 29
                                               In Appendix A, the detailed structure (i.e., pillar, feature, sub-features, and possible
                                       options) of each pillar of the theoretical market framework is depicted. Figure A1 depicts the
                                       structure of the entire market architecture pillar, Figure A2 shows the structure of the sub-
                                            the  structure  of the entire market architecture pillar, Figure A2 shows the structure of the 25 of 29
                                       market
                             Energies 2023,         coordination
                                            16, x FOR PEER REVIEW pillar, Figure A3 deals with the structure of the market optimization
                                            sub-market coordination pillar, Figure A3 deals with the structure of the market optimi-
                                       pillar,    Figure A4 presents the structure of the market operation pillar, and finally Figure A5
                                            zation pillar, Figure A4 presents the structure of the market operation pillar, and finally
                                       showsFigure theA5structure ofstructure
                                                          shows the  the gridofrepresentation   pillar. pillar.
                                                                                 the grid representation
                                                          the structure of the entire market architecture pillar, Figure A2 shows the structure of the
                                                          sub-market coordination pillar, Figure A3 deals with the structure of the market optimi-
                                                          zation pillar, Figure A4 presents the structure of the market operation pillar, and finally
                                                          Figure A5 shows the structure of the grid representation pillar.




                                        Figure A1. Structure of the entire market architecture pillar.
                                     Figure A1. Structure of the entire market architecture pillar.
                                                          Figure A1. Structure of the entire market architecture pillar.




                                                          Figure A2. Structure of the sub-market coordination pillar.
                                     Figure A2. Structure of the sub-market coordination pillar.
                                        Figure A2. Structure of the sub-market coordination pillar.
Energies 2023, 16, 6939                                                                                                                           25 of 28
    Energies 2023, 16, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                               26 of 29




        Energies 2023, 16, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                26 of 29




                                         Figure A3.
                                         Figure A3.Structure
                                                    Structureofof
                                                                the market
                                                                  the      optimization
                                                                      market            pillar.
                                                                              optimization   pillar.
                                          Figure A3. Structure of the market optimization pillar.




        Energies 2023, 16, x FOR PEER REVIEW
                                           Figure A4. Structure of the market operation pillar.                             27 of 29
                                         Figure A4. Structure of the market operation pillar.
                                          Figure A4. Structure of the market operation pillar.




                                         Figure A5. Structure of the grid representation pillar.
                                         Figure A5. Structure of the grid representation pillar.
        References
        1.   European Commission. COM (2018) 773 Final, A Clean Planet for All: A European Strategic Long-Term Vision for A Prosper-
             ous,    Modern,     Competitive     and Climate      Neutral Economy. 28 November            2018. Available    online:
             https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A52018DC0773 (accessed on 10 December 2020).
        2.   CIGRE Working Group C6.19. CIGRE Technical Brochure,Planning and Optimization Methods for Active Distribution Sys-
             tems;                  CIGRE,                 Paris.              2016.                 Available               online:
Energies 2023, 16, 6939                                                                                                              26 of 28




References
1.    European Commission. COM (2018) 773 Final, A Clean Planet for All: A European Strategic Long-Term Vision for A Prosperous,
      Modern, Competitive and Climate Neutral Economy. 28 November 2018. Available online: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-
      content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A52018DC0773 (accessed on 10 December 2020).
2.    CIGRE Working Group C6.19. CIGRE Technical Brochure, Planning and Optimization Methods for Active Distribution Systems;
      CIGRE, Paris. 2016. Available online: https://e-cigre.org/publication/ELT_276_7-planning-and-optimization-methods-for-
      active-distribution-systems (accessed on 13 April 2023).
3.    Hillberg, E.; Antony, Z.; Barbara, H.; Steven, W.; Jean, P.; Jean-Yves, B.; Sebastian, L.; Gianluigi, M.; Kjetil, U.; Irina, O.; et al.
      Flexibility needs in the future power system. In International Smart Grid Action Network—ISGAN Annex 6; ISGAN: Vienna, Austria,
      2019. [CrossRef]
4.    International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA). Power System Flexibility for the Energy Transition, Part 1: Overview for Policy
      Makers. 2018. Available online: https://www.irena.org/-/media/Files/IRENA/Agency/Publication/2018/Nov/IRENA_
      Power_system_flexibility_1_2018.pdf (accessed on 5 February 2021).
5.    International Energy Agency (IEA). Status of Power System Transformation 2019—Power System Flexibility. IEA Webstore. 2019.
      Available online: https://webstore.iea.org/status-of-power-system-transformation-2019 (accessed on 5 February 2021).
6.    Gerres, T.; Ávila, J.P.C.; Martínez, F.M.; Abbad, M.R.; Arín, R.C.; Miralles, Á.S. Rethinking the electricity market design:
      Remuneration mechanisms to reach high RES shares. Results from a Spanish case study. Energy Policy 2019, 129, 1320–1330.
      [CrossRef]
7.    Vicente-Pastor, A.; Nieto-Martin, J.; Bunn, D.W.; Laur, A. Evaluation of Flexibility Markets for Retailer–DSO–TSO Coordination.
      IEEE Trans. Power Syst. 2019, 34, 2003–2012. [CrossRef]
8.    Bertsch, J.; Growitsch, C.; Lorenczik, S.; Nagl, S. Flexibility in Europe’s power sector—An additional requirement or an automatic
      complement? Energy Econ. 2016, 53, 118–131. [CrossRef]
9.    Lind, L.; Cossent, R.; Chaves-Ávila, J.P.; Román, T.G.S. Transmission and distribution coordination in power systems with high
      shares of distributed energy resources providing balancing and congestion management services. WIREs Energy Environ. 2019, 8,
      e357. [CrossRef]
10.   European Union, Directive (EU) 2019/944 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 5 June 2019 on Common Rules for
      the Internal Market for Electricity and Amending Directive 2012/27/EU (Text with EEA relevance.), OJ L. 2019. Available online:
      http://data.europa.eu/eli/dir/2019/944/oj/eng (accessed on 26 December 2020).
11.   Bublitz, A.; Keles, D.; Zimmermann, F.; Fraunholz, C.; Fichtner, W. A survey on electricity market design: Insights from theory
      and real-world implementations of capacity remuneration mechanisms. Energy Econ. 2019, 80, 1059–1078. [CrossRef]
12.   Cramton, P. Electricity market design. Oxf. Rev. Econ. Policy 2017, 33, 589–612. [CrossRef]
13.   Poudineh, R.; Peng, D. Electricity Market Design for A Decarbonised Future: An Integrated Approach; Oxford Institute for Energy
      Studies: Oxford, UK, 2017. [CrossRef]
14.   Anatolitis, V.; Azanbayev, A.; Fleck, A.-K. How to design efficient renewable energy auctions? Empirical insights from Europe.
      Energy Policy 2022, 166, 112982. [CrossRef]
15.   Bell, K.; Gill, S. Delivering a highly distributed electricity system: Technical, regulatory and policy challenges. Energy Policy 2018,
      113, 765–777. [CrossRef]
16.   Bellenbaum, J.; Höckner, J.; Weber, C. Designing flexibility procurement markets for congestion management—investigating
      two-stage procurement auctions. Energy Econ. 2022, 106, 105775. [CrossRef]
17.   Hu, J.; Harmsen, R.; Crijns-Graus, W.; Worrell, E.; van den Broek, M. Identifying barriers to large-scale integration of variable
      renewable electricity into the electricity market: A literature review of market design. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2018, 81,
      2181–2195. [CrossRef]
18.   Mastropietro, P.; Rodilla, P.; Rangel, L.E.; Batlle, C. Reforming the colombian electricity market for an efficient integration of
      renewables: A proposal. Energy Policy 2020, 139, 111346. [CrossRef]
19.   Muñoz, F.D.; Suazo-Martínez, C.; Pereira, E.; Moreno, R. Electricity market design for low-carbon and flexible systems: Room for
      improvement in Chile. Energy Policy 2021, 148, 111997. [CrossRef]
20.   Petitet, M.; Perrot, M.; Mathieu, S.; Ernst, D.; Phulpin, Y. Impact of gate closure time on the efficiency of power systems balancing.
      Energy Policy 2019, 129, 562–573. [CrossRef]
21.   Tolmasquim, M.T.; de Barros Correia, T.; Porto, N.A.; Kruger, W. Electricity market design and renewable energy auctions: The
      case of Brazil. Energy Policy 2021, 158, 112558. [CrossRef]
22.   van der Veen, R. Designing Multinational Electricity Balancing Markets. 2012. Available online: https://repository.tudelft.nl/
      islandora/object/uuid%3Ae1c5777e-be4c-4df3-a764-f622c828c709 (accessed on 2 June 2022).
23.   Woo, C.K.; Milstein, I.; Tishler, A.; Zarnikau, J. A wholesale electricity market design sans missing money and price manipulation.
      Energy Policy 2019, 134, 110988. [CrossRef]
24.   Abbasy, A.; van der Veen, R.; Hakvoort, R. Timing of Markets- the Key Variable in Design of Ancillary Service Markets for
      Power Reserves. In Proceedings of the 3rd World Congress on Social Simulation: Scientific Advances in Understanding Societal
      Processes and Dynamics, Kassel, Germany, 6–9 September 2010; pp. 1–14.
25.   Gerard, H.; Puente, E.I.R.; Six, D. Coordination between transmission and distribution system operators in the electricity sector:
      A conceptual framework. Util. Policy 2018, 50, 40–48. [CrossRef]
Energies 2023, 16, 6939                                                                                                       27 of 28




26.   Delnooz, A.; Vanschoenwinkel, J.; Rivero, E.; Madina, C. Coordinet Deliverable 1.3—Definition of Scenarios and Products for the
      Demonstration Campaigns. Coordinet Project (EU H2020). 2019. Available online: https://private.coordinet-project.eu/files/
      documentos/5d72415ced279Coordinet_Deliverable_1.3.pdf (accessed on 14 June 2023).
27.   Gürses-Tran, G.; Monti, A.; Vanschoenwinkel, J.; Kessels, K.; Chaves-Ávila, J.P.; Lind, L. Business use case development for
      TSO–DSO interoperable platforms in large-scale demonstrations. In Proceedings of the CIRED 2020 Berlin Workshop (CIRED
      2020), Berlin, Germany, 22–23 September 2020; Volume Se2020, pp. 672–674. [CrossRef]
28.   Ruwaida, Y.; Chaves-Avila, J.P.; Etherden, N.; Gomez-Arriola, I.; Gürses-Tran, G.; Kessels, K.; Madina, C.; Sanjab, A.; Santos-
      Mugica, M.; Trakas, D.N.; et al. TSO-DSO-Customer coordination for purchasing flexibility system services: Challenges and
      lessons learned from a demonstration in Sweden. IEEE Trans. Power Syst. 2022, 38, 1883–1895. [CrossRef]
29.   E. CEDEC, ENTSO-E, E. GEODE TSO-DSO Report-An Integrated Approach to Active System Management. 2019. Available
      online: https://docstore.entsoe.eu/Documents/Publications/Position%20papers%20and%20reports/TSO-DSO_ASM_2019_1
      90416.pdf (accessed on 7 December 2020).
30.   INTERRFACE. H2020 Project INTERRFACE Deliverable 3.1—Definition of New/Changing Requirements for Services. INTERRFACE
      H2020 Project; Interrface: Luxemburg, 2020.
31.   Hadush, S.Y.; Meeus, L. DSO-TSO cooperation issues and solutions for distribution grid congestion management. Energy Policy
      2018, 120, 610–621. [CrossRef]
32.   OneNet Project. OneNet H2020 Project OneNet H2020 Project Website. Available online: https://onenet-project.eu/ (accessed on
      29 June 2021).
33.   Kessels, K.; Torbaghan, S.S.; Virag, A.; Le Cadre, H. D3.2 Magnitude Project—Evaluation of Future Market Designs for Multi En-
      ergy System. March 2019. Available online: https://www.magnitude-project.eu/wp-content/uploads/2019/07/MAGNITUDE_
      DEL3.2_R1.0-submitted.pdf (accessed on 31 May 2021).
34.   Drivakou, K.; Bachoumis, T.; Tzoumpas, A.; Troncia, M.; Dominguez, F. OneNet Deliverable 2.1—Review on Markets and
      Platforms in Related Activities. OneNet H2020 Project. March 2021. Available online: https://onenet-project.eu/wp-content/
      uploads/2021/08/D2.1-Review-on-markets-and-platforms-in-related-activities-1.pdf (accessed on 18 November 2021).
35.   Italian Regulatory Authority for Energy, Networks and Environment (ARERA) DCO 322/2019/R/eel, Testo Integrato del
      Dispacciamento Elettrico (TIDE)—Orientamenti Complessivi. 23 July 2019. Available online: https://www.arera.it/allegati/
      docs/19/322-19.pdf (accessed on 18 November 2021).
36.   Bindu, S.; Troncia, M.; Ávila, J.P.C.; Sanjab, A. Bid Forwarding as a Way to Connect Sequential Markets: Opportunities and
      Barriers. In Proceedings of the 2023 19th International Conference on the European Energy Market (EEM), Lappeenranta, Finland,
      6–8 June 2023; pp. 1–6. [CrossRef]
37.   Magois, S.; Serra, M.; Loevenbruck, P.; Budke, J.; Kacprzak, P.; Willeghems, G.; Puente, E.R.; Delaney, N. Conceptual Market
      Organisations for the Provision of Innovative System Services: Role Models, Associated Market Designs and Regulatory
      Frameworks—EU-SysFlex Deliverable 3.2. EU-SysFlex H2020 Project. 2020. Available online: https://eu-sysflex.com/wp-
      content/uploads/2020/06/EU-SysFlex_Task-3.2-Deliverable-Final.pdf (accessed on 30 November 2020).
38.   EUniversal H2020 Project EUniversal Deliverable: D5.1—Identification of Relevant Market Mechanisms for the Procurement
      of Flexibility Needs and Grid Services. EUniversal H2020 Project. 2021. Available online: https://euniversal.eu/wp-content/
      uploads/2021/02/EUniversal_D5.1.pdf (accessed on 4 March 2021).
39.   EPEX SPOT–GME–Nord Pool–OMIE–OPCOM–OTE–TGE EUPHEMIA Public Description—PCR Market Coupling Algorithm.
      Price Coupling of Regions (PCR) Project. 2016. Available online: https://www.nemo-committee.eu/assets/files/Euphemia-
      Public-Description.pdf (accessed on 10 November 2021).
40.   European Commission, Joint Research Centre. Nodal Pricing in the European Internal Electricity Market; Publications Office:
      Luxemburg, 2020; Available online: https://data.europa.eu/doi/10.2760/41018 (accessed on 27 September 2021).
41.   Drivakou, K.; Bachoumis, T.; Tzoumpas, A.; Augusto, C.; Giovanett, S.; Dominguez, F.; Troncia, M.; Lind, L.; Oliveira, F.;
      Gandhi, S.; et al. Business Use Cases for the OneNet D2.3. Deliverable D2.3 OneNet H2020 Project. 2021. Available online:
      https://onenet-project.eu/wp-content/uploads/2022/10/D2.3-Business-Use-Cases-for-the-OneNet.pdf (accessed on 5 June
      2022).
42.   Ávila, J.P.C.; Troncia, M.; Silva, C.D.; Willeghems, G. OneNet Deliverable 3.1—Overview of Market Designs for the Procurement
      of System Services by DSOs and TSOs. OneNet H2020 Project. 2021. Available online: https://onenet-project.eu/wp-content/
      uploads/2021/08/D31-Overview-of-market-designs-for-the-procurement-of-system-services-by-DSOs-and-TSOs-1.pdf (ac-
      cessed on 29 November 2022).
43.   Avila, J.P.C. European Short-Term Electricity Market Designs under High Penetration of Wind Power; TU Delft, Delft University of
      Technology: Delft, The Netherlands, 2014; Available online: http://repository.tudelft.nl/view/ir/uuid:cbc2c7bd-d65e-4f4c-9f88-
      2ab55c11def8/ (accessed on 4 January 2016).
44.   Kyle, A.S. Continuous Auctions and Insider Trading. Econometrica 1985, 53, 1315–1335. [CrossRef]
Energies 2023, 16, 6939                                                                                                            28 of 28




45.   Ávila, J.P.C. European Short-term Electricity Market Designs under High Penetration of Wind Power; Universidad Pontificia de Comillas
      & Université Paris-Sud: Enschede, The Netherlands, 2014; Available online: https://repositorio.comillas.edu/xmlui/handle/11
      531/2683 (accessed on 5 June 2022).
46.   Bompard, E.; Ma, Y.; Napoli, R.; Abrate, G. The Demand Elasticity Impacts on the Strategic Bidding Behavior of the Electricity
      Producers. IEEE Trans. Power Syst. 2007, 22, 188–197. [CrossRef]

Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.
